                               MCQS MRCS-A




    APPLIED BASIC SCIENCES &   UPDATED
                               VERSION
     SURGICAL PRINCIPLES
                               800+
                               MCQS




    DR. SAMREEN MALIK




1
                            MCQS MRCS-A




Part- A   140 Questions (1-57)



Part- B   120 Questions (58-105)



Part- C   220 Questions (106-208)



Part- D   158 Questions (209-301)



Part- E   167 Questions (302-378)



TOTAL:          805 Questions




2
    MCQS MRCS-A




3
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


      You see a 78-year-old lady in the breast clinic who presents with a
      large fungating mass in her right breast. She is confined to a
      wheelchair due to severe respiratory and cardiac disease and has
      3 pillow paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea. Following discussion with
      your consultant you start her on anastrazole 1mg od. Which one of
      the following statements is true regarding ER +ve breast cancers?
      Select one answer only.
      A. Anastrazole is an appropriate treatment choice in the adjuvant
      setting for node positive high risk premenopausal breast cancers
      B. Anastrazole is recommended in the adjuvant setting for post-
      menopausal breast cancers for 10 years
      C. Tamoxifen increases the risk of endometrial carcinoma from
      1:1000 to 2:100
      D. Tamoxifen lowers the HDL:LDL cholesterol ratio
      E. Approximately 90% of breast cancers in post-menopausal
      women are ER +ve.


    ANSWER IS C
    Aromatase inhibitors are used to treat ER +vepost menopausal breast
    cancers in the neo-adjuvant or adjuvant settings, which makes up
    approximately 2/3 of cancers in this age group. They are of no value in
    pre-menopausal women as in these patients the vast majority of
    oestrogen comes from the ovaries and reducing peripheral production
    by anastrazole would cause a reflex increase in the amount produced by
    this source because of the negative feedback mechanism. The current
    recommendation is for 5 years of adjuvant aromatase inhibitor and they
    increase the HDL:LDLraio and as such are cardioprotective.


    A 42-year-old lady has been referred to your breast service with a
    history of a small lump adjacent to the scar in her right breast. She
    has previously had a wide local excision and sentinel node biopsy for
    24mm of grade 3 invasive ductal cancer with node negativity 1 year
    previously. Following her original surgery she had radiotherapy and
    chemotherapy followed by Tamoxifen. She is still having periods. Her
    new lump is very suspicious on imaging for a 2cm recurrent
    carcinoma and a biopsy has revealed recurrent grade 3 carcinoma
    ER +ve. Which of the following statements is correct regarding her
    condition and its treatment? Select one answer only.
4
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


    A. The most appropriate treatment is a wide local excision of the
    tumour followed by radiotherapy to treat the remaining breast
    B. She should have her Tamoxifen changed to anastrazole in
    combination with her surgical management
    C. She does not need further axillary assessment as her previous
    sentinel node was negative
    D. This lady should be counselled for a mastectomy +/- immediate
    reconstruction
    E. Staging is not indicated as it would not change your operative
    management.
    ANSWER IS D
    This lady has already had a wide local excision for an invasive breast
    cancer and developed a recurrence on endocrine treatment. The
    management of this is therefore a mastectomy and discussion of
    reconstruction. The axilla would have to be treated as part of this
    procedure depending on the results of the axillary ultrasound scan. She
    would not be able to have a repeat wide local excision and radiotherapy
    as she has already had radiotherapy before. Despite developing a
    recurrence on Tamoxifen, changing her to Anastrazole would be
    disadvantageous as aromatase inhibitors are only effective in post-
    menopausal women. Prior to surgery staging with CT scans and a bone
    scan should be undertaken to assess for distant metastases. If these are
    present it may alter the surgical treatment offered.
A 56-year-old lady presents to your clinic with a craggy mass in her
epigastrium, 2 stone of weight loss over 4 months and general malaise.
You are concerned that this may represent a gastric malignancy. As part
of her assessment you notice a velvety dark brown pigmentation in her
axillae and groin creases which you recognise as acanthosis nigricans.
Which of the following statements is correct regarding paraneoplastic
syndromes? Select one answer only.
A. They are the consequence of microscopic deposits of tumour cells
which act locally to produce symptoms
B. Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome is often found with ovarian
carcinoma
C. Cushing syndrome associated with small cell lung carcinoma
D. Trousseau’s sign is associated with gastric carcinoma
E. Necrolytic migratory erythema is associated with insulinoma



5
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


    ANSWER IS C
    Paraneoplastic syndromes are diseases or syndromes which are a
    consequence of cancer cells in the body but not due to the local action of
    cancer cells. Lambert-Eaton myaesthenic syndrome is found as a
    consequence of small cell lung cancer, Trousseau‟s sign is multiple crops
    of tender venous nodules caused by hypercoagulability and venous
    thrombosis associated with bronchogenic carcinoma and pancreatic
    carcinoma. Necrotic migratory erythema is associated with
    glucagonomas.
You are counselling a young lady who has come into your clinic
enquiring about testing for familial breast cancer. She has a mother who
developed the disease at 65 and a grandmother who developed it at 43.
Which of the following statements is correct regarding the genetics of
inherited cancers? Select one answer only.
A. Retinoblastoma is a condition associated with hereditary blindness. It
is caused by germline mutations in the Rb1 gene oh Ch 13 in the
majority of cases
B. BRCA I and BRCA II are genes responsible for inherited breast
cancer. They are both associated with an approximate 80% lifetime risk
of breast cancer but BRCA I is also associated with an increased risk of
developing ovarian cancer whilst BRCA II is not
C. Familial Adenomatous Polyposis is a condition which increases the
risk of colorectal carcinoma hugely. The APC (adenomatous polyposis
coli) gene is found on Ch5 and is mutated in a large proportion of this
condition
D. Li-Fraumeni syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition caused by
mutations in the P53 gene
E. Hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (Lynch syndrome) is an
autosomal dominant condition associated with microsatellite instability
which gives carries a 45% lifetime risk of colorectal cancer.
    ANSWER IS C
    The RB1 gene is a tumour suppressor gene on Ch13. In inherited RB
    (30%) there is a germline inactivation of the RB1 gene followed by a
    somatic mutation in the retinal cells later (two hit hypothesis). This
    condition is usually bilateral. In the more common non-heredited RB
    both of the mutations are somatic and this tends to be unilateral. BRCA I
    (Ch17) is associated with 80% risk of breast cancer and 50% risk of
    ovarian cancer over a lifetime whereas the risk of ovarian cancer from

6
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


    BRCA II (Ch13) is 25%. BRCA II is also associated with tumours
    involving the ovaries, fallopian tubes, prostate and pancreas together
    with malignant melanoma. Li Fraumeni is an autosomal dominant
    condition associated with mutations in the TP53 gene (Ch 17) which
    encodes for the p53 protein. It is associated with osteosarcoma, breast
    cancer, brain cancer, leukaemia and adrenocortical cancer. Lynch
    syndrome, is associated with colorectal cancer (80% lifetime risk),
    ovarian, endometrial, stomach, small intestine, hepatobiliary, upper
    urinary, brain and skin cancers. IT is due to DNA mismatch repair
    impairment.
A 53 year old woman presents with a bloody nipple discharge. On
mammography, there is calcification behind the nipple areolar complex.
A core biopsy shows background benign change, but cells that show
comedo necrosis which have not breached the basement membrane.
Which of the lesions below is most likely?
   Fibrocystic disease of the breast
   Ductal carcinoma in situ
   Invasive ductal carcinoma
   Atypical ductal hyperplasia
   Lobular carcinoma in situ
 ANSWER IS B
Comedo necrosis is a feature of high nuclear grade ductal carcinoma in
situ. It is has a high risk of being associated with foci of invasion.
Which of the following statements relating to gas gangrene is untrue?
There is necrosis with putrefaction
The causative pathogens may be detected on normal perineal skin
Treatment with low dose penicillin is indicated
Hyperbaric oxygen may be beneficial
Clostridium perfringens is a recognised cause
ANSWER IS C
Rapid surgery and high dose antibiotics are indicated in the treatment of
gas gangrene
A 78 year old man is referred to the clinic by his general practitioner. For
many years he noticed a smooth swelling approximately 2cm anterior to
the tragus of his right ear. Apart
       from being a heavy smoker he has no co-morbidities. What is the
       most likely diagnosis?

7
                                                            MCQS MRCS-A


  Pleomorphic adenoma
  Liposarcoma
  Warthins tumour
  Adenocarcinoma
  None of the above
ANSWER IS C
Warthins tumours are most common in elderly smokers. They have a
relatively benign and indolent course. They are usually well
circumscribed
A 32 year old man undergoes an appendicectomy. A large carcinoid
tumour is identified and a completion right hemicolectomy is performed.
He is well for several months and then develops symptoms of
palpitations and facial flushing. Which of the following diagnostic
markers should be requested?
   Alpha feto protein
   Urinary 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid measurements
   Urinary catecholamines
   Urinary VMA measurements
   None of the above
ANSWER IS B
5 HIAA is the most commonly used diagnostic marker for carcinoid
syndrome, it is measured in a 24 hour urine collection.


A 32 year old man is admitted with a distended tense abdomen. He
previously underwent a difficult appendicectomy 1 year previously and
was discharged. At laparotomy the abdomen is filled with a gelatinous
substance. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Appendiceal sarcoma
Pseudomyxoma peritoneii
Appendiceal adenocarcinoma
Appendiceal carcinoid
Caecal adenocarcinoma
ANSWER IS B
Pseudomyxoma is classically associated with mucin production and the
appendix is the commonest source

A 56 year old man presents with jaundice. He has a long history of
alcohol misuse. On examination he is jaundiced and ultrasound shows
8
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


multiple echo dense lesions in both lobes of the liver. His alpha feto
protein is elevated 6 times the normal range. What is the most likely
diagnosis?
Gallstones
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma
Mirizzi syndrome
Benign bile duct stricture
ANSWER IS B

HCC may complicate cirrhosis. AFP is often raised in HCC.

A 22 year old man undergoes a splenectomy for an iatrogenic splenic
injury. On the second post operative day a full blood count is performed.
Which of the following components of the full blood count is the first to
be affected ?
Erythrocyte count
Reticulocyte count
Eosinophil count
Monocyte count
Lymphocyte count
ANSWER IS B
The granulocyte and platelet count are the first to be affected following
splenectomy. Then reticulocytes increase. Although a lymphocytosis and
monocytosis are reported, these take several weeks to develop.

A 23 year old man suffers a thermal injury to his left hand. It becomes
red and painful. Which of the following mediators are not involved in this
process?
Histamine
Free radicals
Prostaglandins
Leukotrienes
Serotonin
ANSWER IS B
Acute inflammation is not mediated by free radicals

Chemical mediators facilitate the spread of inflammation into normal tissue
Chemical mediators include:

9
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Lysosomal compounds
Chemokines such as serotinin and histamine (released by platelets and
mast cells)

Other enzyme cascades producing inflammatory mediators include:
Complement, kinin, coagulation system and fibrinolytic system

A 50 year old female presents with bilateral parotid gland swelling and
symptoms of a dry mouth. On examination, she has bilateral facial nerve
palsies. This improved following steroid treatment. What is the likely
underlying diagnosis?
Pleomorphic adenoma
Sarcoid
Warthins tumour
Sialolithiasis
Adenoid cystic carcinoma
ANSWER IS B
 Sarcoid occurs bilaterally in 70% of cases and facial nerve involvement is
recognised. Treatment is conservative in most cases although individuals
with facial nerve palsy will usually receive steroids with good effect

A 28 year old lady presents with benign cyclical mastalgia. Which of the
following is not a recognised treatment for the condition?
Evening primrose oil
Bromocriptine
Methotrexate
Danazol
Tamoxife
ANSWER IS C
Surgical excision of tender breast tissue is inappropriate
Methotrexate is used for the treatment of breast cancer. Whilst the use
of tamoxifen is of benefit other agents such as flaxseed oil or evening
primrose oil should be tried first. Danazol is effective, but many women
dislike the side effects

In patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIb which of the
following clinical appearances is the patient most likely to display?
Acromegalic facies
Turners type features

10
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Profound kyphoscoliosis
Multiple bony exostoses
Marfanoid features

ANSWER IS E
Patients with MEN IIb may display Marfanoid features. It is unclear at the
present time whether they have discrete changes in the microfibrils of
elastic fibres that are present in Marfans.

Which of the following breast tumours is most commonly associated with
a risk of metastasis to the contralateral breast?
Invasive ductal carcinoma
Invasive lobular carcinoma
Phyllodes tumour
Pagets disease of the breast
Atypical ductal hyperplasia
ANSWER IS B
Risk of metastasis to the contralateral breast is a classical feature of
invasive lobular carcinoma.

A 3 year old boy is brought to the clinic by his mother who has noticed a
mass in his neck. On examination; he has a smooth mass located on the
lateral aspect of his anterior triangle, near to the angle of the mandible.
On ultrasound; it has a fluid filled, anechoic, appearance. What is the
most likely cause?
Cystic hygroma
Dermoid cyst
Thyroglossal cyst
Branchial cyst
Lymphoma
ANSWER IS D
Branchial cysts are usually located laterally and derived from the second
branchial cleft. Unless infection has occurred they will usually have an
anechoic appearance on ultrasound.

A 34-year-old man is taken immediately to theatre with aortic dissection.
You note he is tall with pectus excavatum and arachnodactyly. His
condition is primarily due to a defect in which one of the following
proteins?
11
                                                                   MCQS MRCS-A


Polycystin-1
Fibrillin
Type IV collagen
Type I collagen
Elastin
ANSWER IS B
Although fibrillin is the primary protein affected (due to a defect in the
fibrillin-1 gene) it should be noted that fibrillin is used as a substrate of
elastin.

A 28 year old man presents with hypertension and haematuria.
Haematological investigations show polycythaemia but otherwise no
abnormality. CT scanning shows a left renal mass. What is the most
likely cause?
Wilms tumour
Renal adenocarcinoma
Renal transitional cell carcinoma
Staghorn calculus
Renal cyst
ANSWER IS B

Renal adenocarcinoma is the most common variant and is associated
with polycythaemia

An enthusiastic medical student approaches you with a list of questions
about blood transfusion reactions. Which of her following points is
incorrect?
Graft versus host disease involves neutrophil proliferation
Thrombocytopaenia may occur in women with a prior pregnancy
IgA antibodies may cause blood pressure compromise during
transfusion
Hypocalcaemia can occur
Iron overload can be avoided by chelation therapy
ANSWER IS A
Mnemonic for transfusion reactions:

Got a bad unit

G raft vs. Host disease

12
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


O verload
T hrombocytopaenia

A lloimmunization

B lood pressure unstable
A cute haemolytic reaction
D elayed haemolytic reaction

U rticaria
N eutrophilia
I nfection
T ransfusion associated lung injury

GVHD results from lymphocytic proliferation. The patient's own
lymphocytes are similar to the donor's lymphocytes, therefore don't
perceive them as being foreign. The donor lymphocytes, however, sees the
recipient lymphocytes as being foreign. Therefore they proliferate causing
severe complications.

Thrombocytopaenia occurs a few days after transfusion and may resolve
spontaneously.

Patients with IGA antibodies need IgA deficient blood transfusions

A 20-year-old male is referred to the clinic. He has undergone genetic
testing because his father died from colorectal cancer at the age of 21.
His testing revealed a mutation of the APC gene. A colonoscopy is
proposed. What is the most likely finding?
Multiple colonic hamartomas
Carpet villous adenoma of the rectum
Caecal carcinoma
Multiple colonic adenomas
Multiple colonic hyperplastic polyps
ANSWER IS D
APC mutations are found in familial adenomatous polyposis coli. These
have multiple colonic adenomas.

A 22-year-old is found to have bilateral acoustic neuromas. Which of the
disorders listed below is most likely to be present?

13
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Neurofibromatosis Type I
Neurofibromatosis Type II
MEN I
MEN II
Gardner's syndrome

ANSWER IS B
In NF2 bilateral acoustic neuromas are characteristic with a family
history of Neurofibroma.

Which of the following are not typical of Lynch syndrome?
It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner
Affected patients are more likely to develop right colon mucinous
tumours than the general population
Affected individuals have an 80% lifetime risk of colon cancer
Endometrial cancer is seen in 80% of women
Gastric cancers are more common
 ANSWER IS A
Lynch syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. It is
characterised by microsatellite instability in the DNA mismatch repair
genes. Colonic tumours in patients with Lynch syndrome are more likely
to be right sided tumours and to be poorly differentiated.

A 75-year-old lady presents with weight loss, pain and a swelling over
her left knee. She has been treated for Pagets disease of the bone for
some time. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Ewings sarcoma
Osteosarcoma
Myeloma
Septic arthritis
Osteoclastoma
ANSWER IS B
Osteosarcoma may complicate Pagets disease of bone in up to 10%
cases. Radiological appearances include bone destruction coupled with
new bone formation, periosteal elevation may also occur. Surgical
resection is the main treatment
An 82-year-old lady presents with a carcinoma of the caecum.
Approximately what proportion of patients presenting with this diagnosis
will have synchronous lesions?
14
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


<1%
60%
50%
20%
5%
 ANSWER IS E
Synchronous colonic tumours are seen in 5% cases and all patients
having a flexible sigmoidoscopy should have completion colonoscopy if
tumours or polyps are found

Synchronous lesions may occur in up to 5% of patients with colorectal
cancer. A full and complete lumenal study with either colonoscopy, CT
cologram or barium enema is mandatory in all patients being considered
for surgery

A 25-year-old junior doctor has a chest x-ray performed as part of a
routine insurance medical examination. The x-ray shows evidence of rib
notching. Auscultation of his chest reveals a systolic murmur which is
loudest at the posterior aspect of the fourth intercostal space. What is
the most likely diagnosis?
Patent ductus arteriosus
Aortic coarctation
Aortic dissection
Cervical rib
Subclavian steal syndrome
ANSWER IS B
Coarctation of the aorta may occur due to the remnant of the ductus
arteriosus acting as a fibrous constrictive band of the aorta. Weak arm
pulses may be seen, radiofemoral delay is the classical physical finding.
Collateral flow through the intercostal vessels may produce notching of
the ribs, if the disease is long standing.

Which is the characteristic finding on a blood film post splenectomy?
Stipple cell
Tear drop cell
Reticulocytes
Howell-Jolly bodies
Schistocyte
ANSWER IS D

15
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


Blood film in hyposplenism:

Howell-Jolly bodies
Pappenheimer bodies
Poikilocytes (Target cells)
Erythrocyte containing siderotic granules
Heinz bodies

A 39-year-old lady has undergone surgery for breast cancer. As part of
the histopathology report the pathologist provides the surgeon with a
Nottingham Prognostic Index score of 6.4. He also states that the
tumour size is 2cm. Which of the following inferences can be made in
relation to this statement?
The tumour is likely to be grade 1
Vascular invasion is present
Lymph node metastasis are definitely present
The tumour is oestrogen receptor positive
None of the above
ANSWER IS C
A score of this value is unlikely to be reached with a grade 1 tumour and
a size of 2cm. Therefore lymph node metastasis are definitely present.
In addition since the maximal score for lymph node metastasis is 3 the
tumour is likely be of a higher grade (see below). The Nottingham
Prognostic Index provides no information about oestrogen receptor
status or the presence or absence of vascular invasion.

Which of the following is not a typical feature of neuropraxia?
Transient delay in neuronal transmission
Axonal degeneration distal to the site of injury
Absence of neuroma formation
Preservation of autonomic function
Absence of axonal degeneration proximal to the site of injury
ANSWER IS B
Full recovery may occur 6-8 weeks after nerve injury in neuropraxia.
Wallerian degeneration does not usually occur in simple neuropraxia.
Autonomic function is usually preserved
A pregnant woman suddenly develops bilateral leg swelling. Her mother
and aunt were troubled by the same problem. What is the most likely
underlying abnormality?

16
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Anti endomysial antibodies
Anti nuclear antibodies
Anti cardiolipin antibodies
Anti thyroid antibodies
Anti mitochondrial antibodies
ANSWER IS C
Anti phospholipid syndrome= following antibodies
Lupus anticoagulant
Anti-cardiolipin
Anti-β2-glycoprotein

Antiphospholipid syndrome, is an autoimmune, hypercoagulable state
caused by antiphospholipid antibodies. APS provokes blood clots
(thrombosis) in both arteries and veins as well as pregnancy-related
complications such as miscarriage, stillbirth, preterm delivery, or severe
preeclampsia.

The diagnostic criteria requires one clinical event, i.e. thrombosis or
pregnancy complication, and two positive blood tests spaced at least 3
months apart. These antibodies are: lupus anticoagulant, anti-cardiolipin
and anti-β2-glycoprotein.

Antiphospholipid syndrome can be primary or secondary. Primary
antiphospholipid syndrome occurs in the absence of any other related
disease. Secondary antiphospholipid syndrome occurs with other
autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In rare
cases, APS leads to rapid organ failure due to generalised thrombosis; this
is termed catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome (CAPS) and is
associated with a high risk of death.

Antiphospholipid syndrome often requires treatment with anticoagulant
medication such as heparin to reduce the risk of further episodes of
thrombosis and improve the prognosis of pregnancy. Warfarin is not used
during pregnancy because it can cross the placenta, unlike heparin, and is
teratogenic.

A 44-year-old lady presents with a pathological fracture of the left femur.
She has previously undergone a renal transplant for end stage renal
failure. Her blood test results are as follows:



17
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Serum Ca2+ 2.80
PTH 88pg/ml
Phosphate 0.30
A surgeon decides to perform a parathyroidectomy on the basis of these
results. When the glands are assessed histologically, which of the
appearances is most likely to be identified?
Metaplasia the gland
Hypertrophy of the gland
Hyperplasia of the gland
Parathyroid carcinoma
Necrosis of the parathyroid gland
ANSWER IS C
This is likely to be a case of tertiary hyperparathyroidism (high Calcium,
high PTH, low phosphate). Therefore, the glands will be hyperplastic.
Hypertrophy is not correct as this implies an increase in size without an
increase in cellularity. This mistake has cost many candidates marks in
the MRCS exams over the years!

Which of the following associations are incorrect?
Afro-Caribbean skin and keloid scarring
Extensive third degree burns and wound contraction
Chemotherapy and dehisence of healed wounds
Poor healing at the site of previous radiotherapy
Zinc deficiency and delayed healing
ANSWER IS C

A 56 year old man presents with lethargy, haematuria and haemoptysis.
On examination he is hypertensive and has a right loin mass. A CT scan
shows a lesion affecting the upper pole of the right kidney, it has a small
cystic centre. Which of the options below is the most likely diagnosis?
Squamous cell carcinoma of the kidney
Nephroblastoma
Renal adenocarcinoma
Transitional cell carcinoma of the kidney
Polycystic kidney diseas
 ANSWER IS C
Renal adenocarcinoma are the most common renal tumours. These will
typically affect the renal parenchyma. Transitional cell carcinoma will
usually affect urothelial surfaces. Nephroblastoma would be very rare in

18
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


this age group. Renal adenocarcinoma may produce cannon ball
metastasis in the lung which cause haemoptysis, this is not a feature of
PKD.

A 64-year-old woman is reviewed due to multiple non-healing leg ulcers.
She reports feeling generally unwell for many months. Examination
findings include a blood pressure of 138/72 mmHg, pulse 90 bpm, pale
conjunctivae and poor dentition associated with bleeding gums. What is
the most likely underlying diagnosis?
Thyrotoxicosis
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Vitamin C deficiency
Diabetes mellitus
Sarcoidosis
 ANSWER IS C
Bleeding gums and poor healing are suggestive of vitamin C deficiency.

A 45 year old woman is identified as having a gastric gastro-intestinal
stromal tumour. What is the usual cell of origin of these lesions?
Brunners glands
Interstitial cells of Cajal
Primitive stem cells of the gut wall
Fundic glands
Antral goblet cells
 ANSWER IS B
 GIST's are derived from the interstitial pacemaker cells of Cajal. This
means that they are often located extramucosally and macroscopically,
demonstrate little mucosal disruption.

A 30 year old man presents with abdominal distension, a laparotomy is
performed, at operation the abdomen is filled with a large amount of
gelatinous fluid. What is the most likely underlying diagnosis?
Infection with entamoeba histolytica
Pseudomxyoma peritonei
Metastatic colonic cancer
Chylous ascites
None of the above
ANSWER IS B


19
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


 Pseudomyxoma peritoneii- Curative treatment is peritonectomy
(Sugarbaker procedure) and heated intra peritoneal chemotherapy.

Pseudomyxoma is associated with the deposition of large amounts of
gelatinous material. The appendix is the commonest organ or origin.

Which of the following events is most classically seen in the arterioles of
patients with malignant hypertension?
Caseous necrosis
Coagulative necrosis
Fibrinoid necrosis
Apoptosis
Colliquative necrosis
ANSWER IS C
 Fibrinoid necrosis is seen in the arterioles of patients with malignant
hypertension

Which of the following is not a feature of normal cerebrospinal fluid?
It has a pressure of between 10 and 15 mmHg.
It usually contains a small amount of glucose.
It may normally contain up to 5 red blood cells per mm3.
It may normally contain up to 3 white blood cells per mm3.
None of the above
ANSWER IS C
It should not contain red blood cells.

A 22 year old female undergoes a thyroidectomy. The resected
specimen shows a non encapsulated tumour with papillary projections
and pale empty nuclei. What is the underlying diagnosis?
Papillary carcinoma
Follicular carcinoma
Medullary carcinoma
Anaplastic carcinoma
B Cell lymphoma
ANSWER IS A
The presence of papillary structures together with the cytoplasmic
features described is strongly suggestive of papillary carcinoma. They
are seldom encapsulated.

20
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A



A 23 year old man presents with weight loss fatigue and
lymphadenopathy. He is diagnosed with tuberculosis. Which of the
following processes most closely matches the underlying pathological
process?
Type 1 hypersensitivity reaction
Type 2 hypersensitivity reaction
Type 3 hypersensitivity reaction
Type 4 hypersensitivity reaction
None of the above
ANSWER IS D
Granulomas (which occur in tuberculosis) are a feature of Type 4
hypersensitivity reactions.

A 30 year old man is suspected of having appendicitis. At operation an
inflamed Meckels diverticulum is found. Which of the following vessels is
responsible for the blood supply to a Meckels diverticulum?
Right colic artery
Vitelline artery
Appendicular artery
Internal iliac artery
External iliac artery
ANSWER IS B
The vitelline arteries supply a Meckels these are usually derived from
the ileal arcades

A 73 year old man undergoes an emergency amputation for severe
lower limb sepsis and gangrene. Post operatively he develops
disseminated intravascular coagulation. Which of the following clotting
factors will be most rapidly consumed in this process?
Factor V and VIII
Factor I
Factor I and III
Factor III and VII
Factor VI and VIII
ANSWER IS A
 D-I-S-S-E-M-I-N-A-T-E-D

D-Dx: D dimer
21
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


I-Immune complexes
S-Snakebite, shock, heatstroke
S-SLE
E-Eclampsia, HELLP syndrome
M-Massive tissue damage
I-Infections: viral and bacterial
N-Neoplasms
A-Acute promyelocytic leukemia
T-Tumor products: Tissue Factor (TF) and TF-like factors released by
carcinomas of pancreas, prostate, lung,
colon, stomach
E-Endotoxins (bacterial)
D-Dead fetus (retained)

DIC Will tend to consume factors five and eight intially (and platelets).

A 5 year old boy is found to have a Meckels diverticulum at an
appendicectomy and it looks to be non inflamed. What type of epithelium
is most likely to be found in the diverticulum?
Gastric mucosa
Non stratified squamous epithelium
Ileal mucosa
Stratified squamous epithelium
Jejunal mucosa
 ANSWER IS C
Most asymptomatic Meckels diverticulum will be lined by ileal mucosa.
Those which present with bleeding are more likely to contain gastric type
mucosa.

A 23 year old man fractures his right tibia in a sporting accident. At
which point in the healing process is fracture callus most likely to be
visible radiologically?
1 day
7 days
8 weeks
6 weeks
3 weeks
ANSWER IS E
Fracture callus is composed of fibroblasts and chondroblasts and the
synthesis of fibrocartilage. It is typically visible on radiographs
22
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


approximately 3 weeks following injury. If delayed then there may be risk
of non-union.

A 52 year old lady is referred to the breast clinic with symptoms of nipple
discharge. The discharge is usually thick and green. Which of the
following statements relating to the most likely underlying diagnosis is
untrue?
The majority of patients will be smokers
Typically produces blood stained nipple discharge
It is not associated with increased risk of breast cancer
May result in development of mammary duct fistula
May require total duct excision (Hadfields operation) if it fails to resolve
ANSWER IS B
 Blood stained nipple discharge should always be investigated.
Nipple fluid cytology is generally unhelpful.

Discharge of this type of material is most likely to be due to duct ectasia.
Green or brown discharge is most common. Blood stained discharge should
raise concern of intraductal papilloma or cancer

A 45 year woman presents with haematuria. She has a temperature of
38 oC and is found to have a Hb 17g/dl. Her urine dipstick shows nitrites
and 3+ blood. Blood and urine cultures are negative. What is the most
likely cause?
Urinary tract infection
Renal vein thrombosis
Adult polycystic kidney disease
Hypertensive nephropathy
Membranous glomerulonephritis
ANSWER IS B
Renal vein thrombosis is a common feature of renal cell carcinoma as it
invades the renal vein. Other features include PUO, left varicocele and
paraneoplastic endocrine effects due to erythropoietin factor, renin,
ACTH and PTH like substance

A 68 year old man presents with an ulcerated lesion on his right cheek. It
is excised and on histological assessment a squamous cell carcinoma is
diagnosed. It measures 25mm in diameter and is 4mm deep. Which of
the following statements relating to this condition is false?

23
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


In this particular case margins of at least 6mm are required
Use of cryosurgery to treat this patients lesion would have been unsafe
Use of radiotherapy to treat this lesion would have been unsafe
This patients local recurrence rate may approach 15%
The disease usually spreads via lymphatics
ANSWER IS C
 Poor prognostic factors in SCC:
Size >20mm (local recurrence rate of up to 15%)
Depth greater than 4mm (risk of metastasis up to 30%)

This man has an SCC with significant risk of metastasis. Although
cryotherapy may be used to treat SCC it would be most unsafe in this
setting as the lesion extends deeply. However, radiotherapy is a safe
treatment modality for SCC and may be used in selected cases. It is unwise
to use radiotherapy in areas prone to radionecrosis e.g. the nose.

A 5 year old boy presents with recurrent episodes of sinusitis. The
casualty staff are surprised to find his liver lying in the left upper
quadrant of the abdomen. What is the underlying diagnosis?
Von Recklinghausen's disease
Li Fraumeni syndrome
Pierre Robin syndrome
Kartagener's syndrome
MEN I
ANSWER IS D

This is a case of Kartagener's syndrome. The primary problem is of
immotile cilia syndrome. When associated with situs inversus
Kartagener's syndrome is diagnosed.

Which of the tumour markers listed below is most likely to be elevated in
a patient with ovarian cancer?
IgG 4
CEA
CA125
CA19-9
AFP
ANSWER IS C


24
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


 Tumour markers
Tumour markers may be divided into:
monoclonal antibodies against carbohydrate or glycoprotein tumour
antigens
tumour antigens
enzymes (alkaline phosphatase, neurone specific enolase)
hormones (e.g. calcitonin, ADH)

It should be noted that tumour markers usually have a low specificity

Monoclonal antibodies
Tumour marker Association
CA 125 Ovarian cancer
CA 19-9 Pancreatic cancer
CA 15-3 Breast cancer
NB: The breast cancer tumour marker is not specific or sensitive enough to
be used routinely.

Tumour antigens
Tumour marker Association
Prostate specific antigen (PSA) Prostatic carcinoma
Alpha-feto protein (AFP) Hepatocellular carcinoma, teratoma
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) Colorectal cancer

A 28 year old man has a carcinoid tumour identified in his appendix.
Blood testing for which of the substances listed below is likely to be
helpful during follow up?
CA19-9
Alkaline phosphatase
AFP
CEA
Chromogranin A
ANSWER IS E
It is important to distinguish between blood and urine tests for carcinoid
syndrome. Blood tests usually measure chromogranin A,neuron-specific
enolase (NSE), substance P, and gastrin. Urine tests usually measure 5
HIAA, which is a metabolite of serotonin. Sometimes blood tests for 5
hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) are also performed.




25
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


A 32 year old man who has suffered from Crohns disease for many
years presents with intermittent jaundice. When it occurs, it is obstructive
in nature. It then usually resolves spontaneously. What is the most likely
cause?
Crigler Najjar syndrome
Parasitic infection of the liver
Bile duct stones
Gilberts syndrome
Multi cystic liver disease
ANSWER IS C
Bile salts are absorbed in the terminal ileum. When this process is
impaired as in Crohns the patient may develop gallstones, if these pass
into the CBD then obstructive jaundice will result.

A 42 year old lady has suffered from hepatitis C for many years and has
also developed cirrhosis. On routine follow up, an ultrasound has
demonstrated a 2.5cm lesion in the right lobe of the liver. What is the
most likely diagnosis?
Liver metastasis
Liver abscess
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Mesenchymal hamartoma
Liver cyst
ANSWER IS C
In patients with cirrhosis the presence of a lesion >2cm is highly
suggestive of malignancy. The diagnosis is virtually confirmed if the AFP
is >400ng/mL.


A 78 year old lady presents 6 years following a successfully treated
squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus. She has a long history of
dysphagia but it is not progressive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Recurrent malignancy
Oesophageal candidiasis
Radiation stricture
Globus
Pharyngeal pouch
ANSWER IS C



26
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


SCC of the oesophagus is commonly treated with chemoradiotherapy.
Fibrosis and dysphagia may occur in survivors. At 6 years post
treatment, recurrence would be most unusual.

A 68 year old man presents with recurrent episodes of left sided ureteric
colic and haematuria. Investigations show some dilatation of the renal
pelvis but the outline is irregular. What is the most likely underlying
lesion?
Transitional cell carcinoma
Adenocarcinoma
Hamartoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Nephroblastoma
ANSWER IS A
These arise from urothelium and necessitate a nephroureterectomy.

A 23 year old lady presents with a nodule in the right lobe of the thyroid.
Examination of the neck is otherwise unremarkable and clinically she is
euthyroid. Imaging shows a solid nodule at the site. What is the correct
course of action?
Image guided core biopsy
Image guided fine needle aspiration for cytology
Arrange a hemithyroidectomy
Perform an incision biopsy
Perform an excision biopsy
ANSWER IS B
FNAC is the first line investigation in this setting. Whereas FNAC has
declined in popularity recently (in breast investigation), it remain a very
popular option in the investigation of thyroid masses. It cannot reliably
diagnose a follicular tumour.

A 37 year old lady presents with right upper quadrant pain and nausea.
She is otherwise well and her only medical therapy is the oral
contraceptive pill which she has taken for many years with no ill effects.
Her liver function tests and serum alpha feto protein are normal. An
ultrasound examination demonstrates a 4cm non encapsulated lesion in
the right lobe of the liver which has a mixed echoity and heterogeneous
texture. What is the underlying lesion most likely to be?


27
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Liver cell adenoma
Hydatid cyst
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Cystadenoma
Mesenchymal hamartoma
ANSWER IS A
Liver cell adenomas are linked to OCP use and 90% of patients with
liver cell adenomas have used the OCP. Liver function tests are often
normal. The lesions will typically have a mixed echoity and
heterogeneous texture.

A 28 year old female is attends the gynaecology unit for a D+C following
an incomplete miscarriage. She has previously had recurrent pulmonary
embolic events. After the procedure she is persistently bleeding. Her
APTT is 52 (increased). What is the most likely cause?
Antiphospholipid syndrome
DIC
Haemophilia B
von Willebrand disease
Factor V Leiden deficiency
 ANSWER IS A
A combination of thromboembolism and bleeding in a young woman
should raise the possibility of antiphospholipid syndrome. Other features
may include foetal loss, venous and arterial thrombosis and
thrombocytopenia. A Lupus anticoagulant may be present and the APTT
is prolonged

A 12 year old child is admitted with a 12 hour history of colicky right
upper quadrant pain. On examination the child is afebrile and is
jaundiced. The abdomen is soft and non tender at the time of
examination. What is the most likely cause?
Infectious hepatitis
Acute cholecystitis
Cholangitis
Hereditary spherocytosis
Gilberts syndrome
ANSWER IS D
Cholecystitis is unlikely in the absence of focal tenderness


28
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


The child is most likely to have hereditary spherocytosis. In these
individuals there may be disease flares precipitated by acute illness. They
form small pigment stones. These may cause biliary colic and some may
require cholecystectomy.
Gilbert's syndrome is an inherited condition causing unconjugated
hyperbilirubinaemia. Patients may have jaundice or be asymptomatic. The
other LFTs are normal and Gilbert's may be confirmed with a fasting test or
Nicotinic acid test. There is no need for treatment as it is a benign
condition.

A 38 year old lady presents with a recent episode of renal colic. As part
of her investigations the following results are obtained:
Corrected Calcium 3.84 mmol/l
PTH 88pg/ml (increased)
Her serum urea and electrolytes are normal.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Carcinoma of the bronchus
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism
Carcinoma of the breast
ANSWER IS C
In this situation the most likely diagnosis is primary hyperparathyroidism.
The question mentions that serum urea and electrolytes are normal,
which makes tertiary hyperparathyroidism unlikel

A 60 year old man presents with recurrent renal stones. He is found to
have a calcium of 2.72 (elevated) and a PTH of 12 (elevated). What is
the most appropriate long term management plan?
Neck exploration and parathyroidectomy
CT scanning of the neck
MRI scanning of the neck
Medical treatment alone
External beam radiotherapy to the neck
ANSWER IS A
This patient has primary hyperparathyroidism and nephrolithiasis, which
is an indication for parathyroidectomy

Where are sarcomas most likely to be found?

29
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


In the thorax
In the abdomen
Around the axial spine
In the extremities
In the head and neck
ANSWER IS D
40% of sarcomas are found in the extremities

A 4 year old boy presents with haematuria and on examination is found
to have a right sided renal mass. What is the most likely cause?
Wilms tumour
Glomerulonephritis
Horseshoe kidney
Renal adenocarcinoma
Ureteric transitional cell carcinoma
 ANSWER IS A
 Wilms tumours (nephroblastoma) usually present in the first 4 years of
life and may cause lung metastases

A 26 year old man who smokes heavily develops aching, crampy pains
in his legs. On examination, distal limb pulses are diminished. What is
the most likely cause?
Vasculitis
Steal syndrome
Clot embolus
Vasospasm
Arterial injury
ANSWER IS A
This is likely to represent Buergers disease. It is commonest in young
males who smoke heavily.

Alchoholic 56 years male present with haematemsis, which might be the
source of bleeding
A. Oesophageal vein
B. Oesophageal artey
C. Left gastric artery
D. Left gastric vein
E.Gastroduodenal artery


30
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS D---Portacaval anastomosis of lower end of oesophagus as
alcoholic cirrhosis may be there

A 34 year old woman who has previously undergone a colectomy for
familial adenomatous polyposis coli presents with a firm lesion at the
inferior aspect of her rectus abdominis muscle. Which cell type is most
typically associated with such tumours?
Myocytes
Proliferation of apocrine glands
Chondrocytes
Lipoblasts
Myofibroblasts
ANSWER IS E
Desmoid tumours would be the most likely differential here and consist
of a clonal proliferation of myofibroblasts.

A 40 year old women presented with a mass on her forehead. On
examination, she had a fluctuant pulsatile mass on her head.
Examination of her neck revealed a mass inferior to the hyoid with a
positive Berry's sign. What is the most likely underlying diagnosis?
Follicular thyroid cancer
Medullary thyroid cancer
Papillary thyroid cancer
Anaplastic thyroid cancer
Parathyroid gland cancer
ANSWER IS A
Berrys sign= Absence of carotid pulse due to malignant thyromegaly.

Papillary thyroid cancers will tend to spread via lymphatics and present
with disease that is nearly always confined to the neck. Follicular
carcinomas may metastasise haematogenously and the skull may be the
presenting site of disease in between 2 and 8% of patients.

A 65 year old man presents with a history of progressive dysphagia over
the past 4 weeks. For the preceding 5 years he had regularly attended
his general practitioner with symptoms of dyspepsia and reflux. What is
the most likely cause?
Leiomyoma of the oesophagus
Plummer Vinson syndrome

31
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus
Adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus
Achalasia
ANSWER IS D
A short history of progressive dysphagia in a middle aged man who has
a background history of reflux is strongly suggestive of malignancy. Long
standing reflux symptoms may be suggestive of a increased risk of
developing Barretts oesophagus. Note that not all patients with Barretts
transformation alone are symptomatic. In such cases, the tumours are
adenocarcinoma.

A 40 year old man presents with obstructive jaundice and dysphagia.
Twenty years previously he underwent a right hemicolectomy for a
mucinous right sided colonic carcinoma. He was subsequently
diagnosed as having Lynch syndrome. A recent colonoscopy was
normal. What is the most likely cause of his jaundice?
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Liver metastasis from colonic cancer
Pancreatic carcinoma
Duodenal carcinoma
Gastric carcinoma
ANSWER IS E
Lynch syndrome usually results in colonic cancer which is right sided and
mucinous. The next most common site to be affected is the uterus. The
stomach is at particular risk and this risk is up to 10 times greater in
HNPCC (Lynch) patients than the general population. Duodenal adenomas
(and rarely carcinoma) are usually seen in association with FAP. Whilst
pancreatic carcinoma is associated with HNPCC it is far less likely to occur
than gastric cancer.
We are often asked how these patients become jaundiced, this occurs as a
result of nodal spread along the hepatoduodenal ligament nodes to occlude
the porta hepatis resulting in jaundice.

A 24 year old man is diagnosed as having Hodgkins lymphoma. Which
subtype is associated with the most favorable prognosis?
Nodular sclerosing
Lymphocyte depleted
Nodular lymphocyte predominant
Classical lymphocyte predominant
Mixed cellularity
32
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS D
The classical lymphocyte predominant variant has the most favorable
prognosis. Nodular lymphocyte predominant disease is a very different
disease entity and does not have the same favorable prognosis.

Which of the following is not an effect of somatostatin?
It stimulates pancreatic acinar cells to release lipase
It decreases gastric acid secretion
It deceases gastrin release
It decreases pepsin secretion
It decreases glucagon release
ANSWER IS A
 It inhibits pancreatic enzyme secretion

What is the most common cause of mesenteric infarction?
Mesenteric vein thrombosis
Acute embolism affecting the superior mesenteric artery
Acute on chronic thrombus of the superior mesenteric artery
Sub intimal dissection of the superior mesenteric artery
Proximal migration of abdominal aortic aneurysm
ANSWER IS B
Acute embolic events account for up to 50% of cases of mesenteric
infarcts. These may occur as a result of long standing atrial fibrillation,
ventricular anuerysms and post myocardial infarction.

A 73 year old lady is admitted with small bowel obstruction and following
surgery is diagnosed as having diaphragm disease. Which of the agents
listed below is the most likely precipitant?
Alcohol abuse
Oral non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs
Abdominal radiotherapy
Oral steroids
Chronic laxative misuse
ANSWER IS B

Diaphragm disease of the small intestine is caused by NSAIDS in most
cases and treated by surgical resection


33
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


A 42 year old lady has had an axillary node clearance for breast
malignancy. Post operatively she reports weakness of the shoulder. She
is unable to push herself forwards from a wall with the right arm and the
scapula is pushed out medially from the chest wall. What is the most
likely nerve injury?
C5, C6
C8, T1
Axillary nerve
Long thoracic nerve
Spinal accessory nerve
ANSWER IS D
The patient has a winged scapula caused by damage to the long
thoracic nerve (C5,6,7) during surgery. The long thoracic nerve
innervates serratus anterior. Serratus anterior causes pushing out of the
scapula during a punch.

NB winging of the scapular laterally may indicate trapezius muscle
weakness. Innervated by the spinal accessory nerve.

On inspecting the caecum, which of the following structures is most
likely to be identified at the point at which all the tenia coli converge?
Gonadal vessels
Appendix base
Appendix tip
Ileocaecal valve
Ileocolic artery
 ANSWER IS B
he tenia coli converge at the base of the appendix.

Which of the nerves listed below is at greatest risk of injury with a
laceration to the upper lateral margin of the popliteal fossa?
Common peroneal nerve
Sural nerve
Sciatic nerve
Saphenous nerve
Tibial nerve
ANSWER IS A



34
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


The sural nerve exits at the lower infero-lateral aspect of the fossa and is
more at risk in short saphenous vein surgery. The tibial nerve lies more
medially and is even less likely to be injured in this location

A 56 year old lady undergoes a Hartmans style resection of the sigmoid
colon, with ligation of the vessels close to the colon. Which of the
following vessels will be responsible to supplying the rectal stump
directly?
Superior mesenteric artery
Middle colic artery
Superior rectal artery
Inferior mesenteric artery
External iliac artery
 ANSWER IS C
This question is addressing the blood supply to the rectum. Which is
supplied by the superior rectal artery. High ligation of the IMA may
compromise this structure. However, the question states that during the
Hartmans procedure the vessels were ligated close to the bowel.
Implying that the superior rectal was preserved.

A 42 year old lady undergoes a difficult cholecystectomy and significant
bleeding is occurring. The surgeons place a vascular clamp transversely
across the anterior border of the epiploic foramen. Which of the following
structures will be occluded in this manoeuvre?
Cystic artery
Cystic duct
Left gastric artery
Portal vein
None of the above
ANSWER IS D
The portal vein, hepatic artery and common bile duct are occluded.

A 17 year old male presents to the clinic. He complains of difficulty using
his left hand. It has been a persistent problem since he sustained a
distal humerus fracture as a child. On examination, there is diminished
sensation overlying the hypothenar eminence and medial one and half
fingers. What is the most likely nerve lesion?
Anterior interosseous nerve
Posterior interosseous nerve

35
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


Ulnar nerve
Median nerve
Radial nerve
ANSWER IS C
This sensory deficit pattern is most consistent with ulnar nerve injury.

Which of the following nerves is responsible for the innervation of the
posterior belly of the digastric muscle?
Facial nerve
Hypoglossal nerve
Trigeminal nerve
Ansa cervicalis
Mylohoid nerve
ANSWER IS A
The posterior belly of digastric is innervated by the facial nerve and the
anterior belly by the mylohoid nerve.

A 43 year old lady is diagnosed as having a malignant lesion in the
inferior aspect of her left breast. There is palpable axillary
lymphadenopathy. What is the most appropriate course of action?
Mastectomy and axillary node clearance
Wide local excision and axillary node clearance
Wide local excision and sentinel lymph node biopsy
Image guided fine needle aspiration of the axillary nodes
CT scanning of the chest, abdomen and pelvis
ANSWER IS D
 Where axillary nodal involvement is suspected from the outset it is
important to establish whether this is the case prior to surgery. This is
because, if axillary metastatic disease is present then the correct
management would be an axillary node clearance and this is irrespective of
the surgical plans for the breast primary. In the case of breast cancer, image
guided FNAC is acceptable as it is accurate and if carcinoma cells are
identified at FNA then axillary node clearance can be performed. If FNAC is
negative then a sentinel node biopsy should accompany excision of the
primary tumour.
Where the axilla is clinically clear on palpation and imaging then a sentinel
lymph node biopsy should accompany excision of the primary tumour.

What is the most inferior anterior aortic branch?
36
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Median sacral artery
Inferior mesenteric artery
Lumbar artery
Superior mesenteric artery
Gonadal artery
ANSWER IS B
The IMA leaves the front of the aorta usually about 3 to 4cm superior to
its bifurcation. The median sacral is not an anterior branch.

An 18 year old athlete attends orthopaedic clinic reporting pain and
swelling over the medial aspect of the knee joint. The pain occurs when
climbing the stairs, but is not present when walking on flat ground.
Clinically there is pain over the medial, proximal tibia and the McMurray
test is negative. What is the most likely cause of this patient's
symptoms?
Anterior cruciate ligament tear
Prepatellar bursitis
Medial meniscus injury
Pes Anserinus Bursitis
Fracture of tibia
ANSWER IS D
Pes anserinus: GOOSE'S FOOT

Combination of sartorius, gracilis and semitendinous tendons inserting into
the anteromedial proximal tibia.

Pes Anserinus Bursitis is common in sportsmen due to overuse injuries.
The main sign is of pain in the medial proximal tibia. As the McMurray test
is negative, medial meniscal injury is excluded

A 22 year old man suffers a compound fracture of the tibia. During
attempted surgical repair the deep peroneal nerve is divided. Which of
the following muscles will not be affected as a result?
Tibialis anterior
Peroneus longus
Extensor hallucis longus
Extensor digitorum longus
Peroneus tertius



37
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS B
Peroneus longus is innervated by the superficial peroneal nerve (L4, L5,
S1)

Where does Stensens duct primarily open?
Immediately lateral to the foramen caecum
Floor of mouth
Opposite the second molar tooth
Opposite the fifth molar tooth
Into the post nasal space
 ANSWER IS C
Stensens duct conveys secretions from the parotid gland and these
enter the oral cavity at the level of the second molar tooth.

Which of the following muscles is supplied by the musculocutaneous
nerve?
Brachialis
Latissimus dorsi
Flexor carpi ulnaris
Teres minor
Triceps
 ANSWER IS A
Mnemonic

Muscles innervated by the musculocutaneous nerve BBC:

Biceps brachii
Brachialis
Coracobrachialis

A 36-year-old male is admitted for elective surgery for a lymph node
biopsy in the supraclavicular region. Post operatively the patient has
difficulty shrugging his left shoulder. What is the most likely reason?
Phrenic nerve lesion
Axillary nerve lesion
C5, C6 root lesion
C8, T1 root lesion
Accessory nerve lesion
ANSWER IS E


38
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


The accessory nerve lies in the posterior triangle and may be injured in
this region. Apart from problems with shrugging the shoulder, he may
also have difficulty lifting his arm above his head.

A 45 year old man is undergoing a lymph node biopsy from the posterior
triangle of his neck. Which structure forms the posterior border of this
region?
Trapezius muscle
Diagastric muscle
External jugular vein
Omohyoid muscle
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
ANSWER IS A

A 28 year old man is shot in the right chest and develops a right
haemothorax necessitating a thoracotomy. The surgeons decide to
place a vascular clamp across the hilum of the right lung. Which of the
following structures will lie most anteriorly at this point?
Thoracic duct
Phrenic nerve
Vagus nerve
Pulmonary artery
Pulmonary vein
ANSWER IS B
The phrenic nerve lies anteriorly at the root of the right lung.

Which of the following structures lies most posteriorly at the porta
hepatis?
Cystic artery
Common hepatic artery
Left hepatic artery
Portal vein
Common bile duct
 ANSWER IS D
The portal vein is the most posterior structure at the porta hepatis.The
common bile duct is a continuation of the common hepatic duct and is
formed by the union of the common hepatic duct and the cystic duct.

A 48 year old man with newly diagnosed hypertension is found to have a
phaeochromocytoma of the left adrenal gland and is due to undergo a

39
                                                                    MCQS MRCS-A


laparoscopic left adrenalectomy. Which of the following structures is not
directly related to the left adrenal gland?
Crus of the diaphragm
Lesser curvature of the stomach
Kidney
Pancreas
Splenic artery
ANSWER IS B
The left adrenal gland is slightly larger than the right. It is crescent in shape
and its concavity is adapted to the medial border of the upper part of the
left kidney. The upper area is covered by peritoneum of the omental bursa
which separates it from the cardia of the stomach. The lower area is in
contact with the pancreas and splenic artery and is not covered by
peritoneum. On the anterior surface is a hilum from which the suprarenal
vein emerges. The lateral aspect rests on the kidney. The medial is small
and is on the left crus of the diaphragm.

From which structure is the central tendon of the diaphragm derived?
Septum transversum
Pleuroperitoneal folds
Diaphragmatic crura
Dorsal mesocardium
Oropharyngeal membrane
ANSWER IS A
The septum transversum is a thick ridge of mesodermal tissue in the
developing embryo that separates the thoracic and abdominal cavities
and forms the central tendon of the diaphragm.

Which cranial nerve supplies the motor fibres of styloglossus?
Facial
Trigeminal
Vagus
Hypoglossal
Glossopharyngeal
ANSWER IS D
 The hypoglossal nerve supplies motor innervation to all extrinsic and
intrinsic muscles of the tongue. The only possible exception to this is
palatoglossus, which is jointly innervated by the vagus and accessory
nerves.


40
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


An 18 year old boy is undergoing an appendicectomy for appendicitis. At
which of the following locations is the appendix most likely to be found?
Pre ileal
Pelvic
Retrocaecal
Post ileal
None of the above
ANSWER IS C
Most appendixes lie in the retrocaecal position. If a retrocaecal appendix
is difficult to remove then mobilisation of the right colon significantly
improves access.

Which of the following is not a branch of the hepatic artery?
Pancreatic artery
Cystic artery
Right gastric artery
Right hepatic artery
Gastroduodenal artery
ANSWER IS A
The pancreatic artery is a branch of the splenic artery.'

A 72 year old male with end stage critical ischaemia is undergoing an
axillo-femoral bypass. What structure is not closely related to the axillary
artery?
Posterior cord of the brachial plexus
Scalenus anterior muscle
Pectoralis minor muscle
Axillary vein
Lateral cord of the brachial plexus
ANSWER IS B
The axillary artery is the continuation of the subclavian artery. It is
surrounded by the cords of the brachial plexus (from which they are
named). The axillary vein runs alongside the axillary artery throughout its
length

An elderly lady falls and lands on her hip. On examination, her hip is
tender to palpation and x-rays are taken. There are concerns that she
may have an intertrochanteric fracture. What is the normal angle
between the femoral neck and the femoral shaft?
41
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


90o
105o
80o
130o
180o
ANSWER IS D
The normal angle between the femoral head and shaft is 130o. Changes
to this angle may occur as a result of disease or pathology and should
be investigated.

Which option is false in relation to the trigeminal nerve?
The nerve originates at the pons
The posterior scalp is supplied by the trigeminal nerve
The maxillary nerve exits via the foramen rotundum
The maxillary nerve is purely sensory
The motor root is not in the trigeminal ganglion
ANSWER IS B
The posterior scalp is supplied by C2-C3.

Which of the following statements relating to the posterior cerebral artery
is false?
It supplies the visual cortex
It is closely related to the 3rd cranial nerve
It is a branch of the basilar artery
It is connected to the circle of Willis via the superior cerebellar artery
When occluded may result in contralateral loss of field of vision
ANSWER IS D
The posterior cerebral arteries are formed by the bifurcation of the
basilar artery and is connected to the circle of Willis via the posterior
communicating artery.

The posterior cerebral arteries supply the occipital lobe and part of the
temporal lobe.

Which of the following nerves innervates the long head of the biceps
femoris muscle?
Inferior gluteal nerve
Tibial division of sciatic nerve
Superior gluteal nerve
42
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Common peroneal division of sciatic nerve
Obturator nerve
ANSWER IS B
The short head of biceps femoris, which may occasionally be absent, is
innervated by the common peroneal component of the sciatic nerve. The
long head is innervated by the tibial division of the sciatic nerve

How many fissures are present within the right lung?
One
Three
Two
Four
Five
ANSWER IS C
The right lung has an oblique and horizontal fissure. The upper oblique
fissure separates the inferior from the middle and upper lobes. The short
horizontal fissure separates the superior and middle lobes

A 56 year old man is undergoing a pancreatectomy for carcinoma.
During resection of the gland which of the following structures will the
surgeon not encounter posterior to the pancreas itself?
Left crus of the diaphragm
Superior mesenteric vein
Common bile duct
Portal vein
Gastroduodenal artery
 ANSWER IS E
The gastroduodenal artery divides into the gastro-epiploic and
pancreaticoduodenal arteries at the superior aspect of the pancreas

A 76 year old man is undergoing an abdominal aortic aneurysm repair.
The surgeons occlude the aorta with two clamps, the inferior clamp
being placed at the point of aortic bifurcation. Which of the following
vertebral bodies will lie posterior to the clamp at this level?
L1
T10
L4


43
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


L5
L2
ANSWER IS C
The aorta bifurcates at L4. An important landmark that is tested
frequently.

Which nerve supplies the 1st web space of the foot?
Popliteal nerve
Superficial peroneal nerve
Deep peroneal nerve
Tibial nerve
Saphenous nerve
 ANSWER IS C
The first web space is innervated by the deep peroneal nerve.

Which of the following statements relating to the greater omentum is
false?
It is less well developed in children under 5.
It has no relationship to the lesser sac.
It contains the gastroepiploic arteries.
Has an attachment to the transverse colon.
It may be a site of metastatic disease in ovarian cancer.
ANSWER IS B
It is connected with the lesser sac and the transverse colon. This plane
is entered when performing a colonic resection. It is a common site of
metastasis in many visceral malignancies.

Which of the following bones is related to the cuboid's distal articular
surface?
All metatarsals
5th metatarsal
Calcaneum
Medial cuneiform
3rd metatarsal
ANSWER IS B
The cuboid is located at the lateral aspect of the foot between the
calcaneus posteriorly and the 4th and 5th metatarsals distally.


44
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A man develops an infection in his external ear. The infection is
extremely painful. Which of the following nerves conveys sensation from
this region?
Occipital branch of the trigeminal nerve
Vestibulocochlear nerve
Facial nerve
Auriculotemporal nerve
Maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve
ANSWER IS D
Tensor tympania and stapedius are the only two muscles of the middle ear.
Contraction of tensor tympani will tend to dampen the vibrations produced
by loud sounds, it is innervated by a branch of the trigeminal nerve. The
stapedius dampens movements of the ossicles in response to loud sounds
and is innervated by a branch of the facial nerve.

The auriculotemporal nerve, which is derived from the mandibular branch
of the trigeminal nerve supplies this area.

What is the most useful test to clinically distinguish between an upper
and lower motor neurone lesion of the facial nerve?
Blow cheeks out
Loss of chin reflex
Close eye
Raise eyebrow
Open mouth against resistance
ANSWER IS D

Upper motor neurone lesions of the facial nerve- Paralysis of the lower
half of face.
Lower motor neurone lesion- Paralysis of the entire ipsilateral face.

A 53 year old man is undergoing a left hemicolectomy for carcinoma of
the descending colon. From which embryological structure is this region
of the gastrointestinal tract derived?
Vitellino-intestinal duct
Hind gut
Mid gut
Fore gut
Woolffian duct

45
                                                                   MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS B
The left colon is embryologically part of the hind gut. Which accounts for
its separate blood supply via the IMA.
How many compartments are there in the lower leg?
2
1
3
5
4
ANSWER IS E
The posterior compartment of the lower leg has both superficial and
deep posterior layers, together with the anterior and lateral
compartments this allows for four compartments. Decompression of the
deep posterior compartment during fasciotomy may be overlooked with
significant sequelae.

Transection of the radial nerve at the level of the axilla will result in all of
the following except:
Loss of elbow extension.
Loss of extension of the interphalangeal joints.
Loss of metacarpophalangeal extension.
Loss of triceps reflex.
Loss of sensation overlying the first dorsal interosseous.
ANSWER IS B

These may still extend by virtue of retained lumbrical muscle function.

An 18 year old man is stabbed in the axilla during a fight. His axillary
artery is lacerated and repaired. However, the surgeon neglects to repair
an associated injury to the upper trunk of the brachial plexus. Which of
the following muscles is least likely to demonstrate impaired function as
a result?
Palmar interossei
Infraspinatus
Brachialis
Supinator brevis
None of the above
ANSWER IS A
The palmar interossei are supplied by the ulnar nerve. Which lies
inferiorly and is therefore less likely to be injured

46
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A



A 63 year old lady is diagnosed as having an endometrial carcinoma
arising from the uterine body. To which nodal region will the tumour
initially metastasise?
Para aortic nodes
Iliac lymph nodes
Inguinal nodes
Pre sacral nodes
Mesorectal lymph nodes
ANSWER IS B
Tumours of the uterine body will tend to spread to the iliac nodes initially.
Tumour expansion crossing different nodal margins this is of
considerable clinical significance, if nodal clearance is performed during
a Wertheims type hysterectomy.

During the course of a radical gastrectomy the surgeons detach the
omentum and ligate the right gastro-epiploic artery. From which vessel
does it originate?
Superior mesenteric artery
Inferior mesenteric artery
Coeliac axis
Common hepatic artery
Gastroduodenal artery
 ANSWER IS E
The gastroduodenal artery arises at the superior part of the duodenum
and descends behind it to terminate at its lower border. It terminates by
dividing into the right gastro-epiploic artery and the superior
pancreaticoduodenal artery. The right gastro-opiploic artery passes to
the left and passes between the layers of the greater omentum to
anastomose with the left gastro-epiploic artery.'
Which of the following nerves supplies the skin on the palmar aspect of
the thumb?
Ulnar
Median
Radial
Musculocutaneous
None of the above
ANSWER IS B



47
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A 72 year old man has a fall. He is found to have a fractured neck of
femur and goes on to have a left hip hemiarthroplasty. Two months post
operatively he is found to have an odd gait. When standing on his left leg
his pelvis dips on the right side. There is no foot drop. What is the
cause?
Sciatic nerve damage
L5 radiculopathy
Inferior gluteal nerve damage
Previous poliomyelitis
Superior gluteal nerve damage
ANSWER IS E
This patient has a trendelenburg gait caused by damage to the superior
gluteal nerve causing weakness of the abductor muscles. Classically a
patient is asked to stand on one leg and the pelvis dips on the opposite
side. The absence of a foot drop excludes the possibility of polio or L5
radiculopathy.

A 23 year old climber falls and fractures his humerus. The surgeons
decide upon a posterior approach to the middle third of the bone. Which
of the following nerves is at greatest risk in this approach?
Ulnar
Antebrachial
Musculocutaneous
Radial
Intercostobrachial
ANSWER IS D
The radial nerve wraps around the humerus and may be injured during a
posterior approach. An IM nail may be preferred as it avoids the complex
dissection needed for direct bone exposure.

A 32 year old motorcyclist is involved in a road traffic accident. His
humerus is fractured and severely displaced. At the time of surgical
repair the surgeon notes that the radial nerve has been injured. Which of
the following muscles is least likely to be affected by an injury at this
site?
Extensor carpi radialis brevis
Brachioradialis
Abductor pollicis longus
Extensor pollicis brevis
None of the above
48
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS E
Muscles supplied by the radial nerve

BEST
Brachioradialis
Extensors
Supinator
Triceps

The radial nerve supplies the extensor muscles, abductor pollicis longus
and extensor pollicis brevis (the latter two being innervated by the
posterior interosseous branch of the radial nerve)

Mnemonic for intrinsic hand muscles
'A OF A OF A'
A bductor pollicis brevis
O pponens pollicis
F lexor pollicis brevis
A dductor pollicis (thenar muscles)
O pponens digiti minimi
F lexor digiti minimi brevis
A bductor digiti minimi (hypothenar muscles)
Which of the following structures is not located in the superficial perineal
space in females?
Posterior labial arteries
Pudendal nerve
Superficial transverse perineal muscle
Greater vestibular glands
None of the above
ANSWER IS B
The pudendal nerve is located in the deep perineal space and then
branches to innervate more superficial structures.

Through which of the following foramina does the genital branch of the
genitofemoral nerve exit the abdominal cavity?
Superficial inguinal ring
Sciatic notch
Obturator foramen
Femoral canal
Deep inguinal ring
49
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS E
The genitofemoral nerve divides into two branches as it approaches the
inguinal ligament. The genital branch passes anterior to the external iliac
artery through the deep inguinal ring into the inguinal canal. It
communicates with the ilioinguinal nerve in the inguinal canal (though
this is seldom of clinical significance).



A 28 year old man lacerates the posterolateral aspect of his wrist with a
knife in an attempted suicide. On arrival in the emergency department
the wound is inspected and found to be located over the lateral aspect of
the extensor retinaculum (which is intact). Which of the following
structures is at greatest risk of injury?
Superficial branch of the radial nerve
Radial artery
Dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve
Tendon of extensor carpi radialis brevis
Tendon of extensor digiti minimi
ANSWER IS A
The superficial branch of the radial nerve passes superior to the
extensor retinaculum in the position of this laceration and is at greatest
risk of injury. The dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve and artery also pass
superior to the extensor retinaculum n but are located medially.

Which muscle is responsible for causing flexion of the interphalangeal
joint of the thumb?
Flexor pollicis longus
Flexor pollicis brevis
Flexor digitorum superficialis
Flexor digitorum profundus
Adductor pollicis
ANSWER IS A
There are 8 muscles:
1. Two flexors (flexor pollicis brevis and flexor pollicis longus)
2. Two extensors (extensor pollicis brevis and longus)
3. Two abductors (abductor pollicis brevis and longus)
4. One adductor (adductor pollicis)
5. One muscle that opposes the thumb by rotating the CMC joint
(opponens pollicis).

50
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A



Flexor and extensor longus insert on the distal phalanx moving both the
MCP and IP joints.

Which of the following is not an intrinsic muscle of the hand?
Opponens pollicis
Palmaris longus
Flexor pollicis brevis
Flexor digiti minimi brevis
Opponens digiti minimi
ANSWER IS B
Palmaris longus originates in the forearm

Which of the following structures separates the posterior cruciate
ligament from the popliteal artery?
Oblique popliteal ligament
Transverse ligament
Popliteus tendon
Biceps femoris
Semitendinosus
ANSWER IS A
The posterior cruciate ligament is separated from the popliteal vessels at
its origin by the oblique popliteal ligament. The transverse ligament is
located anteriorly.

A 23 year old man is involved in a fight, during the dispute he sustains a
laceration to the posterior aspect of his right arm, approximately 2cm
proximal to the olecranon process. On assessment in the emergency
department he is unable to extend his elbow joint. Which of the following
tendons is most likely to have been cut?
Triceps
Pronator teres
Brachioradialis
Brachialis
Biceps
ANSWER IS A
The triceps muscle extends the elbow joint. The other muscles listed all
produce flexion of the elbow joint.

51
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A



A 43 year old man suffers a pelvic fracture which is complicated by an
injury to the junction of the membranous urethra to the bulbar urethra. In
which of the following directions is the extravasated urine most likely to
pass?
Posteriorly into extra peritoneal tissues
Laterally into the buttocks
Into the abdomen
Anteriorly into the connective tissues surrounding the scrotum
None of the above
ANSWER IS D
The superficial perineal pouch is a compartment bounded superficially
by the superficial perineal fascia, deep by the perineal membrane
(inferior fascia of the urogenital diaphragm), and laterally by the
ischiopubic ramus. It contains the crura of the penis or clitoris, muscles,
viscera, blood vessels, nerves, the proximal part of the spongy urethra in
males, and the greater vestibular glands in females.
When urethral rupture occurs as in this case the urine will tend to pass
anteriorly because the fascial condensations will prevent lateral and
posterior passage of the urine.

You excitedly embark on your first laparoscopic cholecystectomy and
during the operation the anatomy of Calots triangle is more hostile than
anticipated. Whilst trying to apply a haemostatic clip you avulse the
cystic artery. This is followed by brisk haemorrhage. From which source
is this most likely to originate ?
Right hepatic artery
Portal vein
Gastroduodenal artery
Liver bed
Common hepatic artery
ANSWER IS A
The cystic artery is a branch of the right hepatic artery. There are
recognised variations in the anatomy of the blood supply to the
gallbladder. However, the commonest situation is for the cystic artery to
branch from the right hepatic artery.
Which of the following does not pass through the superior orbital
fissure?
Oculomotor nerve
Abducens nerve
52
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Ophthalmic artery
Ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve
Ophthalmic veins
ANSWER IS C
The ophthalmic artery, a branch of the internal carotid enters the orbit
with the optic nerve in the canal.
A man with lung cancer and bone metastasis in the thoracic spinal
vertebral bodies, sustains a pathological fracture at the level of T4. The
fracture is unstable and the spinal cord is severely compressed at this
level. Which of the findings below will not be present 6 weeks after
injury?
Extensor plantar reflexes
Spasticity of the lower limbs
Diminished patellar tendon reflex
Urinary incontinence
Sensory ataxia
ANSWER IS C
A thoracic cord lesion causes spastic paraperesis, hyperrflexia and
extensor plantar responses (UMN lesion), incontinence, sensory loss
below the lesion and 'sensory' ataxia.These features typically manifest
several weeks later, once spinal shock (in which areflexia predominates)
has resolved.

A 43 year old man is reviewed in the clinic following a cardiac operation.
A chest x-ray is performed and a circular radio-opaque structure is noted
medial aspect of the 4th intercostal space on the left. Which of the
following procedures is the patient most likely to have undergone?
Aortic valve replacement with metallic valve
Tricuspid valve replacement with metallic valve
Tricuspid valve replacement with porcine valve
Pulmonary valve replacement with porcine valve
Mitral valve replacement with metallic valve

                                               ANSWER IS E

Which muscle does not insert on the medial surface of the greater
trochanter?
Gemelli
Obturator internus

53
                                                                   MCQS MRCS-A


Piriformis
Quadratus femoris
Obturator externus
ANSWER IS D
Mnemonic for muscle attachment on greater trochanter is POGO:
Piriformis
Obturator internus
Gemelli
Obturator externus

The quadratus femoris fibres pass laterally to be inserted into the
quadrate tubercle on the intertrochanteric crest of the femur. The other
muscles all insert on the trochanteric fossa lying medial to the greater
trochanter.
A 68 year old man with critical limb ischaemia is undergoing a femoro-
distal bypass graft. During mobilisation of the proximal part of the
posterior tibial artery which of the following is at greatest risk of injury?
Tibial nerve
Sciatic nerve
Saphenous nerve
Common peroneal nerve
Medial superior genicular artery
 ANSWER IS A
The tibial nerve is closely related to the posterior tibial artery. The tibial
nerve crosses the vessel posteriorly approximately 2.5cm distal to its
origin. At its origin the nerve lies medial and then lateral after it crosses
the vessel as described.

A 43 year old lady is due to undergo an axillary node clearance as part
of treatment for carcinoma of the breast. Which of the following fascial
layers will be divided during the surgical approach to the axilla?
Sibsons fascia
Pre tracheal fascia
Waldayers fascia
Clavipectoral fascia
None of the above
ANSWER IS D
The clavipectoral fascia is situated under the clavicular portion of
pectoralis major. It protects both the axillary vessels and nodes. During
an axillary node clearance for breast cancer the clavipectoral fascia is
54
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


incised and this allows access to the nodal stations. The nodal stations
are; level 1 nodes inferior to pectoralis minor, level 2 lie behind it and
level 3 above it. During a Patey Mastectomy surgeons divide pectoralis
minor to gain access to level 3 nodes. The use of sentinel node biopsy
(and stronger assistants!) have made this procedure far less common.
What is the largest branch of the brachial artery?
Radial artery
Ulnar artery
Profunda brachii artery
Humeral nutrient artery
Ulnar collateral artery
 ANSWER IS C
The profunda brachii artery is the largest branch and then continues in
the radial groove of the humerus.

Which of the following structures separates the subclavian artery from
the subclavian vein?
Scalenus anterior
Scalenus medius
Sternocleidomastoid
Pectoralis major
Pectoralis minor
ANSWER IS A
The artery and vein are separated by scalenus anterior. This muscle
runs from the transverse processes of C3,4,5 and 6 to insert onto the
scalene tubercle of the first rib.

A 56 year old lady is due to undergo a left hemicolectomy for carcinoma
of the splenic flexure. The surgeons decide to perform a high ligation of
the inferior mesenteric vein. Into which of the following does this
structure usually drain?
Portal vein
Inferior vena cava
Left renal vein
Left iliac vein
Splenic vein
ANSWER IS E



55
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


The inferior mesenteric vein drains into the splenic vein, this point of
union lies close to the duodenum and this surgical maneouvre is a
recognised cause of ileus.

What is the sensory nerve supply to the angle of the jaw?
Maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve
Mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve
C3-C4
Greater auricular nerve (C2-C3)
Buccal branch of the facial nerve
ANSWER IS D
The trigeminal nerve is the major sensory nerve to the face except over
the angle of the jaw. The angle of the jaw is innervated by the greater
auricular nerve.
A 42 year old woman complains of a burning pain of her anterolateral
thigh which worsens on walking. There is a positive tinel sign over the
inguinal ligament. Which nerve is affected?
Ilioinguinal nerve
Genitofemoral nerve
Lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh
Femoral nerve
Saphenous nerve
ANSWER IS C
The lateral cutaneous nerve supplies sensation to the anterior and
lateral aspect of the thigh. Entrapment is commonly due to intra and
extra pelvic causes. Treatment involves local anaesthetic injections

A 43 year old lady is donating her left kidney to her sister and the
surgeons are harvesting the left kidney. Which of the following structures
will lie most anteriorly at the hilum of the left kidney?
Left renal artery
Left renal vein
Left ureter
Left ovarian vein
Left ovarian artery
ANSWER IS B
The renal veins lie most anteriorly, then artery and ureter lies posteriorly



56
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 67 year old man is undergoing an angiogram for gastro intestinal
bleeding. The radiologist advances the catheter into the coeliac axis. At
what spinal level does this vessel typically arise from the aorta?
T10
L3
L4
T12
None of the above
The coeliac axis lies at T12, it takes an almost horizontal angle off the
aorta. It has three major branches.
A 38 year old lady is due to undergo a parathyroidectomy for
hyperparathyroidism. At operation the inferior parathyroid gland is
identified as being enlarged. A vessel is located adjacent to the gland
laterally. This vessel is most likely to be the:
External carotid artery
Common carotid artery
Internal carotid artery
External jugular vein
None of the above

ANSWER IS B
The common carotid artery is a lateral relation of the inferior parathyroid.

A 54-year-old woman undergoes laparoscopic biliary surgery. The
operation is difficult. Following the operation, she becomes unwell. On
the third day, there is bile in the drain and mild jaundice. Select the
single most likely diagnosis from the options listed below.
A. Common bile duct damage
B. Biliary spasm
C. Acute pancreatitis
D. Transfusion reaction
E. Drug-induced biliary stasis.

 ANSWER IS A
Following laparoscopic cholecystectomy, any biliary leak and jaundice
should make one suspicious of bile duct injury. This is best investigated
with ERCP




57
     MCQS MRCS-A




58
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A



During an Ivor Lewis Oesophagectomy for carcinoma of the lower third
of the oesophagus which structure is divided to allow mobilisation of the
oesophagus?
Vagus nerve
Azygos vein
Right inferior lobar bronchus
Phrenic nerve
Pericardiophrenic artery

ANSWER IS B
The azygos vein is routinely divided during an oesophagectomy to allow
mobilisation. It arches anteriorly to insert into the SVC on the right hand
side.

A 45 year old man has a long femoral line inserted to provide CVP
measurements. The catheter passes from the common iliac vein into the
inferior vena cava. At which of the following vertebral levels will this
occur?
L5
L4
S1
L3
L2

ANSWER IS A
The common iliac veins fuse with the IVC at L5.

A 34 year old male is being examined in the pre-operative assessment
clinic. A murmur is identified in the 4th intercostal space just next to the
left side of the sternum. From where is it most likely to have originated?
Mitral valve
Aortic valve
Pulmonary valve
Right ventricular aneurysm
Tricuspid valve
 ANSWER IS E



59
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


The tricuspid valve is generally referred to being best auscultated
adjacent to the sternum. The plane of projected sound from the mitral
area is best heard in the region of the cadiac
Following a carotid endarterectomy a man notices that he has a
weakness of his tongue. Damage to which of the following nerves is the
most likely explanation for this process?
Hypoglossal
Accessory
Ansa cervicalis
Vagus
Cervical plexus

 ANSWER IS A
The hypoglossal nerve innervates the tongue and is one of the
structures more commonly at risk in carotid surgery.

You are assisting in an open right adrenalectomy for a large adrenal
adenoma. The consultant is distracted and you helpfully pull the adrenal
into the wound to improve the view. Unfortunately this is followed by
brisk bleeding. The vessel responsible for this is most likely to be:
Portal vein
Phrenic vein
Right renal vein
Superior mesenteric vein
Inferior vena cava

ANSWER IS E
It drains directly via a very short vessel. If the sutures are not carefully
tied then it may be avulsed off the IVC. An injury best managed using a
Satinsky clamp and a 6/0 prolene

During a radical gastrectomy for carcinoma of the stomach the surgeons
remove the omentum. What is the main source of its blood supply?
Ileocolic artery
Superior mesenteric artery
Gastroepiploic artery
Middle colic artery
Inferior mesenteric artery
ANSWER IS C
60
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


The vessels supplying the omentum are the omental branches of the
right and left gastro-epiploic arteries. The colonic vessels are not
responsible for the arterial supply to the omentum. The left gastro-
epiploic artery is a branch of the splenic artery and the right gastro-
epiploic artery is a terminal branch of the gastroduodenal artery.

A 60 year old female attends the preoperative hernia clinic. She reports
some visual difficulty. On examination she is noted to have a
homonymous hemianopia. Where is the lesion most likely to be?
Frontal lobe
Pituitary gland
Parietal lobe
Optic chiasm
Optic tract

ANSWER IS E
Lesions before optic chiasm:
Monocular vision loss = Optic nerve lesion
Bitemporal hemianopia = Optic chiasm lesion

Lesions after the optic chiasm:
Homonymous hemianopia = Optic tract lesion
Upper quadranopia = Temporal lobe lesion
Lower quadranopia = Parietal lobe lesion

Unfortunately we thought as surgeons we could forget about visual field
defects! However the college seem to like them. Remember a
homonymous hemianopia is indicative of an optic tract lesion. Parietal
lobe lesions tend to cause inferior quadranopias and there is a
bitemporal hemianopia with optic chiasm lesion or pituitary.

During a radical neck dissection, division of which of the following fascial
layers will expose the ansa cervicalis?
Pretracheal fascia
Carotid sheath
Prevertebral fascia
Investing layer of fascia
Sibsons fascia

ANSWER IS A
61
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


The ansa cervicalis lies anterior to the carotid sheath. It may be exposed
by division of the pretracheal fascia at the posterolateral aspect of the
thyroid gland. The pre vertebral fascia lies more posteriorly and division
of the investing layer of fascia will not expose this nerve.



A 32 year old rugby player is hit hard on the shoulder during a rough
tackle. Clinically, his arm is hanging loose on the side. It is pronated and
medially rotated. What structure is most likely to have been
compromised?
Brachial trunks C5-6
Brachial trunks C6-7
Brachial trunks C8 - T1
Anterior interosseous nerve
Posterior interosseous nerve

ANSWER IS A
The patient has an Erb's palsy involving brachial trunks C5-6.

What are the boundaries of the 'safe triangle' for chest drain insertion?
Bounded by trapezius, latissimus dorsi, and laterally by the vertebral
border of the scapula
Bounded by latissimus dorsi, pectoralis major, line superior to the nipple
and apex at the axilla
Bounded by latissimus dorsi, serratus anterior, line superior to the nipple
and apex at the axilla
Bounded by trapezius, deltoid, rhomboid major and teres minor
Bounded by trapezius, deltoid and latissimus dorsi

ANSWER IS B

The vertebral artery traverses all of the following except?
Transverse process of C6
Transverse process of the axis
Vertebral canal
Foramen magnum
Intervertebral foramen
ANSWER IS E

62
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


The vertebral artery passes through the foramina which are located in
the transverse processes of the cervical vertebra, it does not traverse
the intervertebral foramen.

A man undergoes a high anterior resection for carcinoma of the upper
rectum. Which of the following vessels will require ligation?
Superior mesenteric artery
Inferior mesenteric artery
Coeliac axis
Perineal artery
Middle colic artery

 ANSWER IS B
The IMA is usually divided during anterior resection. Not only is this
borne out of oncological necessity but it also permits sufficient colonic
mobilisation for anastomosis.

A 56 year old lady is referred to the colorectal clinic with symptoms of
pruritus ani. On examination a polypoidal mass is identified inferior to the
dentate line. A biopsy confirms squamous cell carcinoma. To which of
the following lymph node groups will the lesion potentially metastasise?
Internal iliac
External iliac
Mesorectal
Inguinal
None of the above

ANSWER IS D
Lesions distal to the dentate line drain to the inguinal nodes.
Occasionally this will result in the need for a block dissection of the
groin.

Which cranial nerve supplies general sensation to the posterior third of
the tongue?
Facial
Trigeminal
Vagus
Hypoglossal
Glossopharyngeal
63
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A



ANSWER IS E
The glossopharyngeal nerve supplies general sensation to the posterior
third of the tongue and contributes to the



Where is a gomphoses type of fibrous joint typically found?
Teeth
Skull
Manubriosternum
Ribs
Femur

ANSWER IS A

A 63 year old man is undergoing a coronary artery bypass procedure.
During the median sternotomy which structure would routinely require
division?
Parietal pleura
Interclavicular ligament
Internal mammary artery
Brachiocephalic vein
Left vagus nerve

 ANSWER IS B
The interclavicular ligament lies at the upper end of a median
sternotomy and is routinely divided to provide access. The pleural
reflections are often encountered and should not be intentionally divided,
if they are, then a chest drain will need to beinserted on the affected side
as collections may then accumulate in the pleural cavity. Other
structures encountered include the pectoralis major muscles, again if the
incision is truly midline then these should not require formal division. The
close relationship of the brachiocephalic vein should be borne in mind
and it should be avoided, iatrogenic injury to this structure will result in
considerable haemorrhage.

At which of the following levels does the inferior vena cava exit the
abdominal cavity?

64
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


T6
T7
T10
T8
T12

ANSWER IS D

Which of the following statements relating to quadratus lumborum is
false?
Causes flexion of the thoracic spine
Causes the rib cage to be pulled down
Innervated by anterior primary rami of T12 and L1-3
Attached to the iliac crest
Inserts into the 12th rib

ANSWER IS A
Quadratus lumborum
Origin: Medial aspect of iliac crest and iliolumbar ligament
Insertion: 12th rib
Action: Pulls the rib cage inferiorly. Lateral flexion.
Nerve supply: Anterior primary rami of T12 and L1-3

The rectus abdominis causes flexion of the thoracic spine and therefore
the statement suggesting that quaratus lumborum does so is incorrect.

Which of the following structures is not transmitted by the jugular
foramen?
Hypoglossal nerve
Accessory nerve
Internal jugular vein
Inferior petrosal sinus
Vagus nerve

ANSWER IS A
The jugular foramen may be divided into three compartments:
Anterior compartment transmits the inferior petrosal sinus
Middle compartment transmits cranial nerves IX, X and XI
Posterior compartment transmits the sigmoid sinus.

65
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A



A 63 year old lady is undergoing an axillary sentinel lymph node biopsy
as part of her breast cancer treatment. Which of the structures listed
below is most likely to be encountered?
Subclavian artery
Intercostobrachial nerve
Upper cord of the brachial plexus
Lower cord of the brachial plexus
Axillary nerve

 ANSWER IS B
During a routine level 1 axillary exploration which is where the majority
of sentinel nodes will be located, the nerves most commonly
encountered are the intercostobrachial nerves.

What vessel is the origin of the middle rectal artery?
Aorta
Inferior mesenteric artery
Superior mesenteric artery
Internal iliac artery
Internal pudendal artery

ANSWER IS D
The rectum is supplied by 3 main vessels
Superior rectal artery from inferior mesenteric artery
Middle rectal artery from the internal iliac artery
Inferior rectal artery from the internal pudendal artery

The superior aspect of the vagina drains to which of the following lymph
node groups?
Superficial inguinal nodes
Para-aortic nodes
Internal iliac nodes
Meso rectal nodes
Obturator nodes

ANSWER IS C


66
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


A 23 year old man undergoes an orchidectomy. The right testicular vein
is ligated; into which structure does it drain?
Right renal vein
Inferior vena cava
Common iliac vein
Internal iliac vein
External iliac vein

ANSWER IS B
The testicular venous drainage begins in the septa and these veins
together with those of the tunica vasculosa converge on the posterior
border of the testis as the pampiniform plexus. The pampiniform plexus
drains to the testicular vein. The left testicular vein drains into the left
renal vein. The right testicular vein drains into the inferior vena cava.

A 21 year old man has an inguinal hernia and is undergoing a surgical
repair. As the surgeons approach the inguinal canal they expose the
superficial inguinal ring. Which of the following forms the lateral edge of
this structure?
Inferior epigastric artery
Conjoint tendon
Rectus abdominis muscle
External oblique aponeurosis
Transversalis fascia

The external oblique aponeurosis forms the anterior wall of the inguinal
canal and also the lateral edge of the superficial inguinal ring. The rectus
abdominis lies posteromedially and the transversalis posterior to this.

What is the lymphatic drainage of the ovaries?
Internal iliac nodes
Common iliac nodes
Para-aortic nodes
Para uterine nodes
Inguinal nodes

ANSWER IS C
The lymphatic drainage of the ovary follows the gonadal vessels and
drainage is therefore to the para-aortic node
67
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A



Which of the muscles listed below is not innervated by the median
nerve?
Flexor pollicis brevis
Lateral two lumbricals
Pronator teres
Opponens pollicis
Adductor pollicis

ANSWER IS E
Adductor pollicis is innervated by the ulnar nerve.
Medial two lumbricals innervated by the ulnar nerve.

A surgical resection specimen is analysed histologically. The pathologist
comments that at the periphery of the resected specimen, oxyphil cells
are identified. In which of the structures listed below are these cells
typically found?
Thymus
Thyroid gland
Parathyroid gland
Lymph node
Adrenal gland

ANSWER IS C
Oxyphil cells are typically found in parathyroid glands

A 19 year old female is admitted with suspected meningitis. The House
Officer is due to perform a lumbar puncture. What is the most likely
structure first encountered when the needle is inserted?
Ligamentum flavum
Denticulate ligament
Dural sheath
Pia Mater
Supraspinous ligament

ANSWER IS E



68
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 45 year old motor cyclist sustains a tibial fracture and is noted to have
anaesthesia of the web space between his first and second toes. Which
of the nerves listed below is most likely to be compromised?
Superficial peroneal nerve
Deep peroneal nerve
Sural nerve
Long saphenous nerve
Tibial nerve

ANSWER IS B
The deep peroneal nerve lies in the anterior muscular compartment of
the lower leg and can be compromised by compartment syndrome
affecting this area. It provides cutaneous sensation to the first web
space. The superficial peroneal nerve provides more lateral cutaneous
innervation.

A 72 year old man develops a foot drop after a revision total hip
replacement. Which nerve is likely to have been affected?
Sciatic
Femoral
Obturator
Superior gluteal
Inferior glutea

ANSWER IS A
Whilst many of these nerves can be injured in hip surgery, for a foot drop
to develop in this context (i.e. revision THR), the sciatic nerve is the most
likely.

A patient undergoes a femoral hernia repair and at operation the
surgeon decides to enter the abdominal cavity to resect small bowel.
She makes a transverse incision two thirds of the way between
umbilicus and the symphysis pubis. Which of the structures listed below
is least likely to be divided?
Rectus abdominis
External oblique aponeurosis
Peritoneum
Fascia transversalis
Posterior lamina of the rectus sheath

69
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A



ANSWER IS E
 An incision at this level lies below the arcuate line and the posterior wall
of the rectus sheath is deficient at this level

Which of the following nerves is most commonly damaged during a
superficial parotidectomy?
Greater auricular
Facial
Greater occipital
Accessory
Opthalmic branch of the trigeminal

ANSWER IS A
The greater auricular nerve and in particular its lobular branch is
commonly injured in parotid surgery and consent usually makes
particular reference to this. In a superficial parotidectomy, the facial
nerve should not be injured and this is less common than a greater
auricular nerve injury

A 44 year old lady is undergoing an abdominal hysterectomy and the
ureter is identified during the ligation of the uterine artery. At which site
does it insert into the bladder?
Posterior
Apex
Anterior
Base
Superior aspect of the lateral side

ANSWER IS D
The ureters enter the bladder at the upper lateral aspect of the base of
the bladder. They are about 5cm apart from each other in the empty
bladder. Internally this aspect is contained within the bladder trigone

A 35 year old farm labourer injures the posterior aspect of his hand with
a mechanical scythe. He severs some of his extensor tendons in this
injury. How many tunnels lie in the extensor retinaculum that transmit the
tendons of the extensor muscles?

70
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


One
Three
Four
Five
Six

ANSWER IS E
There are six tunnels, each lined by its own synovial sheath.

What is the correct embryological origin of the stapes?
First pharyngeal arch
Second pharyngeal arch
Third pharyngeal arch
Fourth pharyngeal arch
Fifth pharyngeal arch

ANSWER IS B
The dorsal ends of the cartilages of the first and second pharyngeal
arches articulate superior to the tubotympanic recess. These cartilages
form the malleus, incus and stapes. At least part of the malleus is
formed from the first arch and the stapes from the second arch. The
incus is most likely to arise from the first arch.

A 23 year old man is involved in a fight outside a nightclub and sustains
a laceration to his right arm. On examination, he has lost extension of
the fingers in his right hand. Which of the nerves listed below is most
likely to have been divided?
Median
Musculocutaneous
Radial
Ulnar
Axillary

ANSWER IS C
The radial nerve supplies the extensor muscle group.

Where are sarcomas most likely to be found?


71
                                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


In the thorax
In the abdomen
Around the axial spine
In the extremities
In the head and neck

ANSWER IS D
40% of sarcomas are found in the extremities

An injured axillary artery is ligated between the thyrocervical trunk of the
subclavian and subscapular artery. Subsequent collateral circulation is
likely to result in reversal of blood flow in which of the vessels listed
below?
Circumflex scapular artery
Transverse cervical artery
Posterior intercostal arteries
Suprascapular artery
Profunda brachii artery

ANSWER IS A
The circumflex scapular artery is a branch of the subscapular artery and
normally supplies the muscle on the dorsal aspect of the scapula. In this
instance, flow is reversed in the circumflex scapular and subscapular
arteries forming a collateral circulation around the scapula.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOTES:

1.Embryological origin
 stapes = 2nd pharyngeal arch
The ectoderm covering the outer aspect of the second arch originates
from a strip of ectoderm lateral to the metencephalic neural fold. The
cartilaginous element to this, eponymously known as Reicherts cartilage
extends from the otic capsule to the midline on each side. Its dorsal end
separates and becomes enclosed in the tympanic cavity as the stapes.

2.Contents of the jugular foramen: -
Anterior: inferior petrosal sinus
Intermediate: glossopharyngeal, vagus, and accessory nerves

72
                                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


Posterior: sigmoid sinus (becoming the internal jugular vein) and some
meningeal branches from the occipital and ascending pharyngeal
arteries.

3. Machine' - Causes of Increased Serum K+
M - Medications - ACE inhibitors, NSAIDS
A - Acidosis - Metabolic and respiratory
C - Cellular destruction - Burns, traumatic injury
H - Hypoaldosteronism, haemolysis
I - Intake - Excessive
N - Nephrons, renal failure
E - Excretion – Impaired

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



A 10 year old boy is admitted to the emergency department following a
fall. On examination, there is deformity and swelling of the forearm. The
ability to flex the fingers of the affected limb is impaired. However, there
is no sensory impairment. Imaging confirms a displaced upper forearm
fracture. Which of the nerves listed below is likely to have been
affected?
Ulnar
Posterior interosseous nerve
Anterior interosseous nerve
Axillary
Radial

ANSWER IS C
Forearm fractures may be complicated by neurovascular compromise.
The anterior interosseous nerve may be affected. It has no sensory
supply so the defect is motor alone.

What is the lymphatic drainage of the male spongy urethra?
External iliac nodes
Internal iliac nodes
Para aortic nodes
Deep inguinal nodes
Meso rectal nodes

73
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A



ANSWER IS D
The lymphatic drainage of the spongy urethra and the glans penis is to
the deep inguinal nodes. The prostatic and membranous urethra drains
to the internal iliac nodes.

Which of the following forms the medial wall of the femoral canal?
Pectineal ligament
Adductor longus
Sartorius
Lacunar ligament
Inguinal ligament

ANSWER IS D
The femoral canal and the femoral triangle are distinct anatomical
structures.

Deficiency of which vitamin is most likely to explain the presentation of a
3 year old child with Rickets?
Vitamin C
Vitamin B3
Vitamin D
Vitamin A
Vitamin E



ANSWER IS C
Vitamin D is needed to help mineralise bone. When this is deficient,
mineralisation is inadequate and deformities may result.

A 72 year old man develops a foot drop after a revision total hip
replacement. Which nerve is likely to have been affected?
Sciatic
Femoral
Obturator
Superior gluteal
Inferior gluteal


74
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS A
Whilst many of these nerves can be injured in hip surgery, for a foot drop
to develop in this context (i.e. revision THR), the sciatic nerve is the most
likely.

A 56 year old man presents with episodes of pruritus ani and bright red
rectal bleeding. On examination there is a mass in the ano rectal region
and biopsies confirm squamous cell cancer. What is the most likely
cause?
Anal cancer
Rectal cancer
Soft tissue sarcoma
Retro-rectal cyst
Pilonidal sinus disease

ANSWER IS A
These are features of anal cancer. Anal cancers arise from the
cutaneous epithelium and are therefore typically squamous cell. They
are usually sensitive to chemoradiotherapy.

An injured axillary artery is ligated between the thyrocervical trunk of the
subclavian and subscapular artery. Subsequent collateral circulation is
likely to result in reversal of blood flow in which of the vessels listed
below?
Circumflex scapular artery
Transverse cervical artery
Posterior intercostal arteries
Suprascapular artery
Profunda brachii artery

ANSWER IS A
The circumflex scapular artery is a branch of the subscapular artery and
normally supplies the muscle on the dorsal aspect of the scapula. In this
instance, flow is reversed in the circumflex scapular and subscapular
arteries forming a collateral circulation around the scapula.

A 68 year old man with poorly controlled diabetes presents with severe
otalgia and headaches. On examination, there is granulation tissue

75
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


within the external auditory meatus. What is the most likely underlying
infective agent?
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Streptococcus pyogenes
Staphylococcus aureus
Actinomyces
Bacteroides fragilis

ANSWER IS A
Malignant otitis externa is caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa

Severe pain, headaches and granulation tissue within the external
auditory meatus are key features of malignant otitis externa. Diabetes
mellitus is one of the commonest risk factors.

A 40 year old lady presents to the surgical clinic with symptoms related
to varicose veins. She has noticed that these first developed when she
was pregnant. On examination, she has a truncal varicosity of the medial
leg, there are no ulcers or skin changes. A hand held Doppler
examination demonstrates sapheno popliteal junction reflux. What is the
most appropriate course of action?
Offer the patient sapheno-popliteal junction ligation
Offer the patient foam sclerotherapy of the sapheno-popliteal junction
Offer the patient laser ablation of the sapheno-popliteal junction
Arrange contrast venography
Arrange a duplex scan

ANSWER IS E
Sapheno-popliteal junction incompetence must be imaged prior to
starting treatment.

A male infant, born at term appears well following delivery. Six hours
later, he is noted to have bilious vomiting by the paediatricians. On
examination, he seems well and his abdomen is soft and non tender.
What is the best course of action?
Arrange an abdominal x-ray
Undertake a test feed
Perform serial abdominal examinations


76
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


Arrange an upper GI contrast study
Arrange a laparotomy

ANSWER IS D
Bilious vomiting in neonates is a surgical emergency and is intestinal
malrotation and volvulus until otherwise proven. It is investigated with an
upper GI contrast study. Contrast should be seen to exit the stomach
and the location of the DJ flexure is noted (it lies to the left of the
midline). If this is not the case, or the study is inconclusive, a laparotomy
is performed.

A 3 month old boy is brought to the clinic by his mother who has noticed
a swelling in the right hemiscrotum. On examination, there is a firm mass
affecting the right spermatic cord distally, the testis is felt separately from
it. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Inguino scrotal hernia
Rhadomyosarcoma
Leydig cell tumour
Torsion of testicular hydatid
Hydrocele

ANSWER IS B
 Rhabdomyosarcoma are paratesticular tumours with a bimodal
distribution. Because the mass is felt separate to the testis, this is the
more likely diagnosis.
5% of testicular tumors
Most often arises in distal portion of spermatic cord and may invade
testis of surrounding tissues
60% occur in the first 2 decades of life
Bimodal age distribution - 3-4 months - 16 years
Arises from mesenchymal tissue - 90% embryonal variant (better
prognosis) - 30% - 50% have metastasis (usually lymph node) at
diagnosis.

What is the correct embryological origin of the stapes?
First pharyngeal arch
Second pharyngeal arch
Third pharyngeal arch


77
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


Fourth pharyngeal arch
Fifth pharyngeal arch

ANSWER IS B
 Embryological origin stapes = 2nd pharyngeal arch
The ectoderm covering the outer aspect of the second arch originates
from a strip of ectoderm lateral to the metencephalic neural fold. The
cartilaginous element to this, eponymously known as Reicherts cartilage
extends from the otic capsule to the midline on each side. Its dorsal end
separates and becomes enclosed in the tympanic cavity as the stapes.

The dorsal ends of the cartilages of the first and second pharyngeal
arches articulate superior to the tubotympanic recess. These cartilages
form the malleus, incus and stapes. At least part of the malleus is
formed from the first arch and the stapes from the second arch. The
incus is most likely to arise from the first arch.

A 78 year old lady presents 6 years following a successfully treated
squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus. She has a long history of
dysphagia but it is not progressive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Recurrent malignancy
Oesophageal candidiasis
Radiation stricture
Globus
Pharyngeal pouch

ANSWER IS C
SCC of the oesophagus is commonly treated with chemoradiotherapy.
Fibrosis and dysphagia may occur in survivors. At 6 years post
treatment, recurrence would be most unusual.

Which of the following sutures would be most appropriate for closure of
the scrotal skin following an orchidopexy in a 3 year old boy who is
otherwise well?
5/0 vicryl
5/0 vicryl rapide
5/0 polypropylene
3/0 vicryl
3/0 silk

78
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A



ANSWER IS B
In children, its always best to use absorbable sutures where possible
(removal is a very challenging undertaking). Most surgeons prefer vicryl
rapide for this purpose and 5/0 provides adequate strength.

A 6 day old baby was born prematurely at 33 weeks. He has been
suffering from respiratory distress syndrome and has been receiving
ventilatory support on NICU. He has developed abdominal distension
and is increasingly septic. Ultrasound of the abdomen shows free fluid
and evidence of small bowel dilatation. His blood pressure has remained
labile despite inotropic support. What is the best course of action?
Laparoscopy
Laparotomy
Contrast enema
Upper GI contrast study
MRI abdomen



ANSWER IS B
He has necrotising enterocolitis and whilst this is often initially managed
medically a laparotomy is required if the situation deteriorates.

When is it mandatory to involve an independent mental capacity
advocate ?
When a patient requires a significant intervention, time permits and the
patient lacks capacity to decide for themselves
When a patient cannot decide on the best treatment
When parents disagree about treatment of a child
When two doctors disagree about the best treatment option
When a patient has lost trust in their clinician

ANSWER IS A
The Mental Capacity Act (MCA) requires doctors to involve an
independent mental capacity advocate (IMCA) for serious medical
treatment decisions when:
a best interests decision is required because the doctor has assessed
the person as not having the capacity to make the decision themselves
the person does not have family or friends with whom it is appropriate to
79
                                                            MCQS MRCS-A


consult about the decision.

Serious medical treatment is defined in the Mental Capacity Act 2005
(Independent Mental Capacity Advocates) (General) Regulations 2006
as treatment which involves providing, withdrawing or withholding
treatment in circumstances where one or more of the following apply:
in a case where a single treatment is being proposed, there is a fine
balance between its benefits to the patient and the burdens and risks it
is likely to entail for them
in a case where there is a choice of treatments, a decision as to which
one to use is finely balanced
what is proposed would be likely to involve serious consequences for the
patient.
The MCA Code of Practice says that serious consequences may include
treatment options which:
cause serious and prolonged pain, distress or side effects have
potentially major consequences for the patient (for example, major
surgery or stopping life-sustaining treatment)
have a serious impact on the patients future life choices.

Which of the arterial blood gas analyses shown below would most likely
be seen with a patient who has a pulmonary embolus?
pH 7.64, pO2 10.0 kPa pCO2 2.8 kPa, HCO3 20
pH 7.25, pO2 8.9, pCO2 3.2, HCO3 10
pH 7.20, pO2 6.2, pCO2 8.2, HCO3 27
pH 7.60, pO2 8.2, pCO2 5.8, HCO3 40
pH 7.50, pO2 7.2, pCO2 2.5, HCO3 24

ANSWER IS E
A combination of hypoxia and respiratory alkalosis should suggest a
pulmonary embolus. The respiratory alkalosis is due to hyperventilation
associated with the pulmonary embolism.



A patient is referred due to the development of a third nerve palsy
associated with a headache. On examination, meningism is present.
Which one of the following diagnoses needs to be urgently excluded?
Weber's syndrome
Internal carotid artery aneurysm
Multiple sclerosis

80
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Posterior communicating artery aneurysm
Anterior communicating artery aneurysm

ANSWER IS D
Painful third nerve palsy = posterior communicating artery aneurysm

Given the combination of a headache and third nerve palsy it is
important to exclude a posterior communicating artery aneurysm.

A 19 year old female is admitted with suspected meningitis. The House
Officer is due to perform a lumbar puncture. What is the most likely
structure first encountered when the needle is inserted?
Ligamentum flavum
Denticulate ligament
Dural sheath
Pia Mater
Supraspinous ligament
ANSWER IS E

What is the earliest complication that can occur following construction of
an ileostomy?
Prolapse
Retraction
Necrosis
Parastomal hernia
Dermatitis

ANSWER IS C
Construction of a stoma may be complicated by several factors.
Necrosis may occur because of technical errors in mesenteric division,
excessive tension or failure to construct a fascial defect of adequate size
to permit safe passage of the mesentery and the bowel.

Which of the following nerves supplies the skin on the palmar aspect of
the thumb?
Ulnar
Median
Radial

81
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Musculocutaneous
None of the above

ANSWER IS B
The median nerve supplies cutaneous sensation to this region.

A 38 year old man is playing football when he slips over during a tackle.
His knee is painful immediately following the fall. Several hours later he
notices that the knee has become swollen. Following a course of non
steroidal anti inflammatory drugs and rest the situation improves.
However, complains of recurrent pain. On assessment in clinic you
notice that it is impossible to fully extend the knee, although the patient
is able to do so when asked. What is the most likely injury?
Anterior cruciate ligament rupture
Posterior cruciate ligament rupture
Torn meniscus
Medial collateral ligament tear
Chondromalacia patellae

ANSWER IS C
Twisting sporting injuries followed by delayed onset of knee swelling and
locking are strongly suggestive of a menisceal tear. Arthroscopic
menisectomy is the usual treatment.
A 10 year old boy is admitted to the emergency department following a
fall. On examination, there is deformity and swelling of the forearm. The
ability to flex the fingers of the affected limb is impaired. However, there
is no sensory impairment. Imaging confirms a displaced upper forearm
fracture. Which of the nerves listed below is likely to have been
affected?
Ulnar
Posterior interosseous nerve
Anterior interosseous nerve
Axillary
Radial
ANSWER IS C
 Forearm fractures may be complicated by neurovascular compromise.
The anterior interosseous nerve may be affected. It has no sensory
supply so the defect is motor alone.


82
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


A 25-year-old female with a history of bilateral vitreous haemorrhage is
referred with bilateral lesions in the cerebellar region. What is the likely
diagnosis?
Neurofibromatosis type I
Neurofibromatosis type II
Tuberous sclerosis
Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome
Sarcoidosis

ANSWER IS D
Retinal and cerebellar haemangiomas are key features of Von Hippel-
Lindau syndrome. Retinal haemangiomas are bilateral in 25% of patients
and may lead to vitreous haemorrhage.

Which of the following structures is not transmitted by the jugular
foramen?
Hypoglossal nerve
Accessory nerve
Internal jugular vein
Inferior petrosal sinus
Vagus nerve

ANSWER IS A
Contents of the jugular foramen:

Anterior: inferior petrosal sinus
Intermediate: glossopharyngeal, vagus, and accessory nerves
Posterior: sigmoid sinus (becoming the internal jugular vein) and some
meningeal branches from the occipital and ascending pharyngeal
arteries

The jugular foramen may be divided into three compartments:
Anterior compartment transmits the inferior petrosal sinus
Middle compartment transmits cranial nerves IX, X and XI
Posterior compartment transmits the sigmoid sinus

Which of the following drugs increases the rate of gastric emptying in the
vagotomised stomach?


83
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Ondansetron
Metoclopramide
Cyclizine
Erythromycin
Chloramphenicol

ANSWER IS D
Vagotomy seriously compromises gastric emptying which is why either a
pyloroplasty or gastro-enterostomy is routinely performed at the same
time.

Chloramphenicol has no effect on gastric emptying. Ondansetron slows
gastric emptying slightly. Metoclopramide increases the rate of gastric
emptying but its effects are mediated via the vagus nerve. Erythromycin
enhances gastric emptying by acting via the motilin receptor in the gut.

A 70 year old lady presents with a number of skin lesions that she
describes as unsightly. On examination she has a number of raised
lesions with a greasy surface located over her trunk. Apart from having a
greasy surface the lesions also seem to have scattered keratin plugs
located within them. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Keratoacanthoma
Pilar cysts
Dermatofibroma
Seborrhoeic keratosis
Epidermoid cyst

ANSWER IS D
Seborrhoeic keratosis may have a number of appearances. However,
the scaly, thick, greasy surface with scattered keratin plugs makes this
the most likely diagnosis

he superior aspect of the vagina drains to which of the following lymph
node groups?
Superficial inguinal nodes
Para-aortic nodes
Internal iliac nodes
Meso rectal nodes
Obturator nodes

84
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A



ANSWER IS C

Which of the following structures is not directly related to the right
adrenal gland?
Diaphragm posteriorly
Kidney inferiorly
Right renal vein
Inferior vena cava
Hepato-renal pouch

ANSWER IS C
The right renal vein is very short and lies more inferiorly.

Which of the following does not cause hyperkalaemia?
Haemolysis
Burns
Familial periodic paralysis
Type 4 renal tubular acidosis
Severe malnutrition

ANSWER IS E
Familial periodic paralysis has subtypes associated with hyper and
hypokalaemia.

A 19 year old man is playing rugby when he suddenly notices a severe
pain at the posterolateral aspect of his right thigh. Which of the following
muscle groups is most likely to have been injured?
Semimembranosus
Semitendinosus
Long head of biceps femoris
Gastrocnemius
Soleus
ANSWER IS C
The biceps femoris is the laterally located hamstring muscle. The
semitendinosus and semimembranosus are located medially. Rupture of
gastrocnemius and soleus may occur but is less common.


85
                                                                   MCQS MRCS-A


Mobilisation of the left lobe of the liver will facilitate surgical access to
which of the following?
Abdominal oesophagus
Duodenum
Right colic flexure
Right kidney
Pylorus of stomach

ANSWER IS A
The fundus of the stomach is a posterior relation. The pylorus lies more
inferolaterally. During a total gastrectomy division of the ligaments
holding the left lobe of the liver will facilitate access to the proximal
stomach and abdominal oesophagus. This manoeuvre is seldom
beneficial during a distal gastrectomy.

A male infant, born at term by normal vaginal delivery is well. However,
72 hours following delivery, he has still not passed meconium. On
examination, his abdomen is soft and not particularly distended. He has
a normally sited anus. What is the best course of action?
Undertake a colonoscopy and pan colonic biopsies
Undertake a flexible sigmoidoscopy and left sided colonic biopsies
Undertake full thickness rectal biopsies
Undertake a loop colostomy
Undertake a loop ileostomy



ANSWER IS C
 Delayed passage of meconium is suggestive of Hirschsprung's disease
and the investigation of choice is full thickness suction rectal biopsy. If
Hirschprungs is confirmed, then the correct treatment is laparotomy and
stoma formation. At between 9 and 12 months of age, definitive surgery
(usually resection and primary anastomosis) is performed.

Which of the following aortic branches leaves the aorta approximately
1cm below the coeliac axis?
Renal artery
Inferior mesenteric artery
Superior mesenteric artery


86
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Lumbar artery
Gonadal artery

ANSWER IS C
The SMA leaves the aorta approximately 1cm below the coeliac axis.
This is usually a level of L1. It is crossed anteriorly by the splenic vein
and the body of the pancreas. It runs downwards and forwards anterior
to the uncinate process.

A 22 year old man presents with a 5 day history of sore throat, malaise
and fatigue. On examination he has a large peritonsillar abscess. What
is the most likely underlying infective organism?
Epstein Barr Virus
Streptococcus pyogenes
Cytomegalovirus
Moraxella catarrhalis
Streptococcus viridans

 ANSWER IS B
Quinsy usually occurs as a result of bacterial tonsillitis and the most
common cause of bacterial tonsillitis is streptococcal organisms.

A 23 year old man who plays rugby for a hobby presents with recurrent
anterior dislocation of the shoulder. Which of the following abnormalities
is most likely to be present to account for this?
Rotator cuff tear
Biceps tendon rupture
Bankart lesion
Axillary nerve injury
Infraspinatus tendinitis

 ANSWER IS C
A Bankart lesion is an injury of the anterior (inferior) glenoid labrum of
the shoulder due to anterior shoulder dislocation. When this happens, a
pocket at the front of the glenoid forms that allows the humeral head to
dislocate into it.

Anterior dislocations are the most common. When recurrent, a Bankart

87
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


lesion is the most common underlying abnormality. This is usually
visualised by CT and MRI scanning and often repaired arthroscopically.

Through which of the structures listed below does the axillary nerve
pass?
Quadrangular space
Triangular space
Subclavicular space
Sub pectoral space
Intercostal space

ANSWER IS A
Axillary nerve passes through the quadrangular space.

A 24 year old woman presents with a long history of obstructed
defecation and chronic constipation. She often strains to open her
bowels for long periods and occasionally notices that she has passed a
small amount of blood. On examination, she has an indurated area
located anteriorly approximately 3cm proximal to the anal verge. What is
the most likely diagnosis?
Haemorrhoids
Rectal cancer
Ulcerative colitis
Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome
Fissure in ano

ANSWER IS D
Solitary rectal ulcers are associated with chronic constipation and
straining. It will need to be biopsied to exclude malignancy (the
histological appearances are characteristic). Diagnostic work up should
include endoscopy and probably defecating proctogram and ano-rectal
manometry studies.

A 23 year old man is stabbed in the neck, in the region between the
omohyoid and digastric muscles, the injury is explored surgically. At
operation a nerve injury is identified immediately superior to the lingual
artery as is branches off the external carotid artery. Which of the
following is the most likely result of this injury?


88
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


Paralysis of the ipsilateral side of the tongue
Abduction of the ipsilateral vocal cord
Winging of the scapula
Paralysis of the ipsilateral hemi diaphragm
Inability to abduct the shoulder

ANSWER IS A
The hypoglossal nerve runs anterior to the external carotid, above the
lingual arterial branch. If damaged then ipsilateral paralysis of the
genioglossus, hyoglossus and styloglossus muscles will occur. If the
patient is asked to protrude their tongue then it will tend to point to the
affected side.

A 34 year old man presents with symptoms attributable to a fistula in
ano. He is examined in the lithotomy position and the external opening
of the fistula is identified in the 7 o'clock position. At which of the
following locations is the internal opening most likely to be identified?
7 o'clock
12 o'clock
9 o'clock
3 o'clock
6 o'clock

 ANSWER IS E
Goodsals rule:
Anterior fistulae will tend to have an internal opening opposite the
external opening.
Posterior fistulae will tend to have a curved track that passes towards
the midline.

According to Goodsalls rule the track of a posteriorly sited fistula will
track to the posterior midline (i.e. 6 o'clock)



A 72 year old man is recovering from an inguinal hernia repair when he
suffers from an extensive CVA. He is managed on the rehabilitation unit.
However, he is still not able to feed safely and repeated swallowing
assessments have shown that he tends to aspirate. Which of the
following is the best option for long term feeding?

89
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


PEG tube feeding
Feeding jejunostomy
Total parenteral nutrition
Long term naso gastric tube feeding
Withold feeding and palliate

ANSWER IS A
A PEG tube is the best long term option although they are associated
with a significant degree of morbidity. A feeding jejunostomy would
require a general anaesthetic. TPN is not a good option. Long term naso
gastric feeding is usually unsatisfactory.

A 67 year old man is investigated for biliary colic and a 4.8 cm
abdominal aortic aneurysm is identified. Which of the following
statements relating to this condition is untrue?
The wall will be composed of dense fibrous tissue only
The majority are located inferior to the renal arteries
They occur most often in current or former smokers
He should initially be managed by a process of active surveillance
Aortoduodenal fistula is a recognised complication following repair.

ANSWER IS A
They are true aneurysms and have all 3 layers of arterial wall.

A 22 year old man is hit over the head with an iron bar. On arrival in the
emergency department he opens his eyes in response to pain, his only
verbal responses are in the form of groans and grunts. On application of
a painful stimulus to his hands, he flexes his forearms away from the
painful stimuli. What is his Glasgow coma score?
8
6
10
5
12
ANSWER IS A
E=2, V=2, M=4.
Appropriate flexion to pain carries a higher score than decorticate
posturing or inappropriate flexion.


90
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


A 3 year old boy is brought to the clinic with symptoms of urinary
hesitancy and poor stream. Which of the following is the most likely
underlying diagnosis?
Benign prostatic hypertrophy
Posterior urethral valves
Neurogenic bladder
Urethral calculus
Hypospadias

ANSWER IS B
Posterior urethral valves are one of the commonest causes of poor
urinary stream and hesitancy in children. Prostatic disorders are rare.
Hypospadias is associated with urine that is difficult to control, but
should not produce hesitancy.

Which statement is true when prescribing nutritional support?
A. For severely ill patients aim to give < 50% energy needs in the first
24-48 hours
B. For patients at risk of refeeding syndrome, they should be given 35
kcal/kg/day initially
C. For severely ill patients aim to give the full energy needs in the first
24-48 hours
D. Patients on diuretics are unlikely to need thiamine
E. Patients on chemotherapy are unlikely to need thiamine

                                                     ANSWER IS A
A group of surgeons review a meta-analysis of a series of randomised
controlled trials on the Cochrane database and decide that one type of
hip replacement is superior to another. What level of evidence is this?
II
III
I
V
IV

ANSWER IS C
A meta- analysis of more than one well designed trials will typically
represent level I evidence. It does, of course, depend on how well the
trials were conducted and reported.

91
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A



A 44 year old man is involved in a road traffic accident. He suffers
significant injuries to his thorax, he has bilateral haemopneumothoraces
and a suspected haemopericardium. He is to undergo surgery, what is
the best method of accessing these injuries?
Bilateral thoracoscopy and mediastinoscopy
Midline sternotomy
Bilateral posterolateral thoracotomy
Clam shell thoracotomy
None of the above

ANSWER IS D
 Patients with significant mediastinal and lung injuries are best operated
on using a Clam shell thoracotomy. All modes of access involve a
degree of compromise. A sternotomy would give good access to the
heart. However, it takes longer to perform and does not provide good
access to the lungs. Trauma should not be managed using laparoscopy.

Which of the following statements is true of glucagon?
Produced in response to hyperglycaemia
Released by beta cells
Inhibits gluconeogenesis
Produced in response to an increase of amino acids
Composed of 2 alpha polypeptide chains linked by hydrogen bonds

ANSWER IS D
Glucagon is a protein comprised of a single polypeptide chain.
Produced by alpha cells of pancreatic islets of Langerhans in response
to hypoglycaemia and amino acids.
It increases plasma glucose and ketones.

A 55 year old man with no co-morbidity is due to undergo a Milligan
Morgan haemorrhoidectomy, what is the most appropriate method of
delivering immediate post operative analgesia?
Pudendal nerve block
Caudal block
Rectal NSAIDS
IV fentanyl
Paracetamol

92
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS B
 Following excisional haemorrhoidectomy, severe pain is not unusual, a
well placed caudal anaesthetic will counter this. A pudendal nerve block
is an alternative but is less effective than a caudal.

Which of the following is not a change found on an ECG in acute
pulmonary embolism?
No changes
J waves
P pulmonale
Right ventricular strain
T wave inversion in the inferior leads

ANSWER IS B
J waves are pathognomonic of hypothermia.

Which of the following statements in relation to the p53 tumour
suppressor protein is false?
It may induce necrosis of cells with non repairable DNA damage
It is affected in Li Fraumeni syndrome
It can induce DNA repair
It can halt the cell cycle
It may inhibit angiogenesis

ANSWER IS A
When DNA cannot be repaired it will induce cellular apoptosis (not
necrosis).
The following statements relating to the ankle joint are true except?
Three groups of ligaments provide mechanical stability
The sural nerve lies medial to the Achilles tendon at its point of insertion
Eversion of the foot occurs at the sub talar joint
The flexor hallucis longus tendon is the most posterior structure at the
medial malleolus
The saphenous nerve crosses the ankle joint.

ANSWER IS B
The sural nerve lies behind the distal fibula. Inversion and eversion are
sub talar movements. The structures passing behind the medial

93
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


malleolus from anterior to posterior include: tibialis posterior, flexor
digitorum longus, posterior tibia vein, posterior tibial artery, nerve, flexor
hallucis longus.

With respect to the basilic vein, which statement is false?
Its deep anatomical location makes it unsuitable for use as an
arteriovenous access site in fistula surgery
It originates from the dorsal venous network on the hand
It travels up the medial aspect of the forearm
Halfway between the shoulder and the elbow it lies deep to muscle
It is joined by the brachial vein to form the axillary vein

ANSWER IS A
It is used in arteriovenous fistula surgery during a procedure known as a
basilic vein transposition.

Which of the energy devices below would be most suited for resection of
a parietal lobe tumour?
Monopolar diathermy in coagulation mode
Harmonic ACE
CUSA device
Monopolar diathermy in cutting mode
Ligasure system

ANSWER IS C
CUSA systems minimize thermal injury and current flow to the
surrounding areas.

A 63 year old male is admitted to the surgical ward for an elective
femoral popliteal bypass. He suddenly starts complaining of central,
crushing chest pain which is radiating to the left arm. The Nursing staff
start high flow oxygen and give a spray of glyceryl trinitrate spray.
Unfortunately there is no relief of symptoms. What is the next agent to
be administered?
Aspirin 75mg
Clopidogrel 75mg
Aspirin 300mg
Clopidogrel 300mg
Direct admission to angiography suite
94
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A



ANSWER IS C
Aspirin 300mg should be given as soon as possible. If the patient has a
moderate to high risk of myocardial infarction, then Clopidogrel should
be given with a low molecular weight heparin. Thromboloysis or urgent
percutaneous intervention should be given if there are significant ECG
changes.

A 54 year old lady has her serum calcium measured. Assuming her
renal function is normal, what proportion of calcium filtered at the
glomerulus will be reabsorbed by the renal tubules?
5%
15%
25%
50%
95%

ANSWER IS E
Most filtered calcium is reabsorbed (95%) a rare disorder of familial
hypocalcemic calciurea may affect this proportion.

A 74 year old man presents with a painful right leg. The pain developed
suddenly the preceeding evening. However, he wondered if it might
resolve overnight, instead, it has got worse. On examination, his right leg
is cold and white with diminished distal sensation. A CT angiogram
shows a thrombus occluding the external iliac artery with no
atheromatous disease. What is the most appropriate course of action?
Femoral embolectomy and below knee fasciotomy
Femoral embolectomy alone
Femoral popliteal bypass graft without fasciotomy
Femoral embolectomy with above and below knee fasciotomy
Femoro-femoro cross over graft with above and below knee fasciotomy

ANSWER IS A
Delayed limb re-perfusion = Risk of compartment syndrome

Delayed surgery for limb ischaemic carries a risk of re-perfusion injury
and compartment syndrome. Where surgery is delayed beyond 6 hours,
most surgeons would perform a fasciotomy at the same time as the

95
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


embolectomy. However, whilst the compartments below the knee are
vulnerable, its very rare for this to occur in the thigh and so, as a rule,
the thigh is not treated in this manner.

A 63 year old man presents with a claudication distance of 15 yards. He
is a lifelong heavy smoker. On examination, his foot is hyperaemic and
there is a small ulcer at the tip of his great toe. Which of the ABPI
measurements shown below is most compatible with this process?
0.5
>1.2
0.8
0.3
1.0

                                                        ANSWER IS A

A 54-year-old female is admitted one week following a cholecystectomy
with profuse diarrhoea. Apart from a minor intra-operative bile spillage
incurred during removal of the gallbladder, the procedure was
uncomplicated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Campylobacter infection
E. coli infection
Clostridium difficile infection
Salmonella infection
Pelvic abscess

ANSWER IS C
Antibiotics are not routinely administered during an uncomplicated
cholecystectomy. Indications for administration of broad spectrum
antibiotics include intraoperative bile spillage. Delayed pelvic abscesses
following bile spills are extremely rare since most surgeons will manage
these intra-operatively.

A 30 year old man presents with back pain and the surgeon tests the
ankle reflex. Which of the following nerve roots are tested in this
manoeuvre?
S3 and S4
L4 and L5
L3 and L4


96
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


S1 and S2
S4 only

                                                       ANSWER IS D

A 25 year old women presents with a slowly enlarging mass on the side
of the face. Clinical examination demonstrates that the mass is located
in the tail of the parotid gland. There is no evidence of facial nerve
involvement. What is the most likely cause?
Sialolithiasis
Adenocarcinoma
Warthins tumour
Oncocytoma
Pleomorphic adenoma

 ANSWER IS E
 Pleomorphic adenomas are the commonest tumours of the parotid
gland and are often slow growing, smooth and mobile. Warthins tumours
are typically found in elderly males and are composed of multiple cysts
and solid components consisting of lymphoid tissue. Warthins tumours
are most often found in the tail of the parotid gland, but not in 25 year old
females, where a pleomorphic adenoma remains the most likely lesion.

A group of surgeons review a meta-analysis of a series of randomised
controlled trials on the Cochrane database and decide that one type of
hip replacement is superior to another. What level of evidence is this?
II
III
I
V
IV
ANSWER IS C
A meta- analysis of more than one well designed trials will typically
represent level I evidence. It does, of course, depend on how well the
trials were conducted and reported.

A 19 year old man undergoes an open inguinal hernia repair. The cord is
mobilised and the deep inguinal ring identified. Which of the following
structures forms its lateral wall?

97
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


External oblique aponeurosis
Transversalis fascia
Conjoint tendon
Inferior epigastric artery
Inferior epigastric vein
ANSWER IS B
The transversalis fascia forms the superolateral edge of the deep
inguinal ring. The epigastric vessels form its inferomedial wall.

A 73 year old man presents with a 1.5cm ulcerated basal cell carcinoma
on his back. What is the best course of action?
Excision with 0.5cm margin
Excision with 2cm margin
Excision biopsy
Incision biopsy
Excision with 3cm margin

ANSWER IS A
A small lesion such as this is adequately treated by local excision. The
British Association of Dermatology guidelines suggest that excision of
conventional BCC (<2cm) with margins of 3-5mm have locoregional
control rates of 85%. Morphoeic lesions have higher local recurrence
rates.

A 72 year old lady has a 4cm basal cell carcinoma excised from her right
cheek. There is a rhomboid defect measuring 4cm by 4cm. What is the
best option for managing the wound?
Delayed primary closure
Direct primary closure
Full thickness skin graft
Split thickness skin graft
Myocutaneous flap

ANSWER IS C
Facial wounds that are large and irregularly shaped are best managed
with full thickness skin grafts.




98
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


A 74 year old male with colon cancer sustains an iatrogenic splenic
injury during surgery. He is bleeding profusely. What is the most
appropriate course of action?
Infusion of human prothrombin complex
Infusion of packed red cells
Infusion of blood from the cell saver salvaged during surgery
Infusion of factor VIII concentrate
Infusion of gelofusine

ANSWER IS B
The cell saver is inappropriate because the cells will be contaminated
with malignant cells and faecal matter from the open bowel.

A 53 year old alcoholic male presents with acute pancreatitis. He is
clinically dehydrated. His blood results show normal renal function and
electrolytes. Which of the intravenous fluids below should be
prescribed?
0.9% sodium chloride and 40mmol KCl
5% dextrose
Hartmanns solution
10% dextrose and 20mmol KCl
5% dextrose and 40 mmol KCl

ANSWER IS C
This patient needs fluid replacement due to large third space losses.
Hartmann's solution is recommended. N. Saline would put this patient at
risk of hyperchloraemic acidosis.

Which of the following sutures would be most appropriate for securing a
chest drain following a thoracotomy?
2/0 silk
4/0 silk
1 polypropylene
1/0 polypropylene
3/0 vicryl rapide

ANSWER IS A



99
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


Silk is popular for securing drains as it knots reliably and is easy to
handle.

A 56 year old man presents with epigastric discomfort and episodes of
migratory thrombophlebitis. On examination he is mildly jaundiced. A CT
scan shows peri hilar lymphadenopathy and a mass in the pancreatic
head. Which of the following is the most likely underlying diagnosis?
Squamous cell carcinoma of the pancreas
Adenocarcinoma of the pancreas
Insulinoma
Glucagonoma
Gastrinoma

ANSWER IS B
 Adenocarcinoma of the pancreas is the most likely diagnosis and
migratory thrombophlebitis is associated with the condition. Squamous
cells carcinoma is extremely uncommon in the pancreas. Gastrinoma
are extremely rare and thus not the most likely diagnos.

Which of the muscles listed below would be affected if the radial nerve
were injured in a humeral shaft fracture?
Supinator
Flexor digitorum profundus
Brachialis
Abductor pollicis brevis
Abductor digiti minim

                                     ANSWER IS A
A 68 year old man has a TCC of the bladder. He has a right
hydronephrosis detected on ultrasound and deteriorating renal function.
A DMSA scan shows a non functioning left kidney. At cystoscopy the
ureteric orifice cannot be readily accessed. What is the best course of
action?
Insertion of antegrade ureteric stent
Insertion of retrograde ureteric stent
Cystectomy and ileal conduit
Radiotherapy
Instillation of intravesical BCG


100
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS A
Antegrade ureteric stents pass from the kidney to the bladder
Retrograde stents pass from the bladder to the kidney

A TCC occluding the ureteric orifice will obscure its identification during
surgery, so that passage of a retrograde stent is difficult. Therefore
passage of a stent from the renal pelvis is preferable.

A 1 year old child has been unwell with a sore throat and fever for
several days. He progresses to develop periumbilical abdominal
discomfort and passes diarrhoea. The paediatricians call you because
the ultrasound has shown a 'target sign' on the right side of the
abdomen. What is the best initial course of action?
Obtain intravenous access, administer fluids and antibiotics
Undertake urgent fluoroscopic reduction
Undertake urgent hydrostatic reduction
Undertake a colonoscopy
Undertake a laparotomy

ANSWER IS A
Always ensure that children with intussusception are resuscitated first.
Administration of antibiotics is also important. This should precede any
intervention.

During a colonoscopy, a patient is found to have a colonic cancer in the
caecum and a 1cm polyp (which looks adenomatous) in the sigmoid
colon. What is the correct management of the sigmoid polyp?
Undertake a snare polypectomy
Leave in situ until the cancer has been resected
Perform a hot biopsy
Perform a cold biopsy
Resect the sigmoid at the same time as the cancer resection

ANSWER IS B
Dysplasia and cancer are not the same disease. All colonic adenomas
are dysplastic. Adenomas greater than 2cm may harbor foci of
malignancy within them. However, many have dysplastic cells only.
These do not require segmental resection.


101
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


When a cancer has been identified during endoscopy, it is safest to
avoid undertaking polyp interventions as there is a risk of seeding.

A 22 year old man undergoes a superficial parotidectomy for a
pleomorphic adenoma. The operation does not proceed well and a
diathermy malfunction results in division of the buccal branch of the
facial nerve. Which of the following muscles will not demonstrate
impaired function as a result?
Zygomaticus minor
Mentalis
Buccinator
Levator anguli oris
Risorius

                                                ANSWER IS B

A 43 year old lady is admitted with cholestasis secondary to a stone
impacted at the level of the ampulla of vater. Which of the following tests
is most likely to be predictive of bleeding diathesis at the time of ERCP
in this particular case?
Bleeding time
Prothrombin time
APTT
Platelet count
Factor I levels

ANSWER IS B
PT: Vitamin K dependent factors 2, 7, 9, 10
APTT: Factors 8, 9, 11, 12

Jaundice will impair the production of vitamin K dependent clotting
factors. This is most accurately tested by measuring the prothrombin
time. APTT can be affected by vitamin K deficiency (due to factor 9
deficiency), however this occurs to a lesser extent and is normally
associated with severe liver disease. The bleeding time is a measure of
platelet function.
A 62 year old diabetic man presents with long standing plantar ulcer he
has clinical evidence of a charcot foot. What is the most likely diagnosis?


102
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Mixed ulcer
Chronic obliterative arterial disease
Neuropathic ulcer
Squamous cell carcinoma
Deep venous insufficiency

ANSWER IS C
Plantar ulcers in association with peripheral neuropathy are often
neuropathic. They classically occur at pressure points.

A 43 year old lady presents with an attack of acute pancreatitis. It is
classified as a mild attack on severity scoring. Imaging identifies
gallstones but a normal calibre bile duct, and a peripancreatic fluid
collection. Which of the following management options is most
appropriate?
Intravenous octreotide
Cholecystectomy once the attack has settled
Nasogastric tube drainage of the stomach
Insertion of a radiological drain
Avoidance of enteral feedin

ANSWER IS B
Patients with gallstone pancreatitis should undergo early
cholecystectomy.
Enteral feeding helps minimise gut bacterial translocation and should be
given to most patients with pancreatitis. Many studies have evaluated
the role of octreotide in reducing pancreatic secretions and shown no
benefit (Uhl W et al Gut 1999 45:97-104, McKay C et al. Int J Pancreatol
1997; 21: 13-19).
The use of antibiotics in pancreatitis is controversial. However, a
Cochrane review has presented reasonable evidence in favor of
administration of imipenem to prevent infection in established necrosis.

A 21 year old man falls down a ravine whilst skiing and is trapped for
several hours. He is finally brought to the emergency department
profoundly hypothermic with a core temperature of 29oC. Which method
is most effective at raising the core temperature?
Re-warming with electric blankets
Increasing the room temperature
Instillation of warm intravesical fluid
Instillation of warmed rectal fluid
Instillation of warmed intra peritoneal fluid
103
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A



ANSWER IS E
 Visceral cavity re-warming be it lung or abdomen (or both) provides
rapid rewarming. Only extracorporeal circulatory devices provide faster
rates of re-warming.

Which of the following hormonal agents will increase secretions of water
and electrolytes in pancreatic juice?
Secretin
Aldosterone
Somatostatin
Cholecystokinin
Adrenaline

ANSWER IS A
Secretin causes secretion of water and electrolytes
Cholecystokinin causes enzyme secretion

While secretin will typically increase electrolyte and water volume of
secretions, the enzyme content in increased by cholecystokinin.
Somatostatin will decrease the volume of secretions. Aldosterone will
tend to conserve electrolytes.




A 63 year old man undergoes a radical cystectomy for carcinoma of the
bladder. During the procedure there is considerable venous bleeding.
What is the primary site of venous drainage of the urinary bladder?
Vesicoprostatic venous plexus
Internal iliac vein
External iliac vein
Gonadal vein
Common iliac vein

ANSWER IS A
The urinary bladder has a rich venous plexus surrounding it, this drains
subsequently into the internal iliac vein. The vesicoprostatic plexus may
be a site of considerable venous bleeding during cystectomy.

104
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 60-year-old patient has no significant past medical history and a 90%
stenosis of the left and a 60% stenosis of the right internal carotid artery.
Choose the most appropriate treatment option from the list below.
A. Right carotid endarterectomy
B. Left carotid endarterectomy
C. Right carotid artery stenting
D. Left carotid artery stenting
E. No surgical/endovascular intervention.

ANSWER IS E
Current guidelines (National Clinical Guideline for Stroke, 4th ed, 2012,
Royal College of Physicians) dictate the following for asymptomatic
carotid artery stenosis:
1. Screening for asymptomatic carotid stenosis should not be
performed.
2. Surgery or angioplasty/stenting for asymptomatic carotid artery
stenosis should not routinely be performed unless as part of a
randomised trial.
3. Carotid endarterectomy or stenting should not be performed routinely
in patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis prior to coronary artery
surgery.

An 85-year-old patient has no symptoms and a 90% stenosis of the left
and a 40% stenosis of the right internal carotid artery. Choose the most
appropriate treatment option from the list below.
A. Right carotid endarterectomy
B. Left carotid endarterectomy
C. Right carotid artery stenting
D. Left carotid artery stenting
E. No surgical/endovascular intervention.
ANSWER IS E
Carotid endarterectomy is indicated for patients with a symptomatic (ie
transient ischaemic attack [TIA] or amaurosis fugax) > 70% stenosis of
an internal carotid artery. With regard to asymptomatic but significant
internal carotid artery stenosis, a recent randomised trial has shown that
surgery will reduce the risk of stroke from around 12% to 6% over a 5-
year period. Most surgeons would therefore not operate on patients with
asymptomatic stenosis who are 80 years of age or older. Carotid
stenting is still an experimental procedure and its use is confined to
randomised clinical trials; previous series have shown an unacceptably
high stroke rate with carotid stenting compared with surgery.

105
      MCQS MRCS-A




106
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 54-year-old woman with known inflammatory bowel disease presents
with a large nodulo-pustular ulcerating lesion over her right anterior shin.
It has a blue overhanging necrotic edge. Her ankle–brachial pressure
indices are normal. Select the most appropriate diagnosis for this case.
A. Squamous cell carcinoma
B. Hypertensive ulcer (Martorell syndrome)
C. Pyoderma gangrenosum
D. Neuropathic ulcer
E. Vasculitic ulcer

ANSWER IS C
Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) are recurring nodulopustular ulcers
commonly affecting the legs, abdomen and face. They are tender and
have a red or blue overhanging necrotic edge. They heal with cribriform
scars. Over 50% of patients with PG have associated underlying active
or quiescent systemic disease – such as inflammatory bowel disease,
seronegative rheumatoid arthritis, a lymphoproliferative disease,
autoimmune hepatitis or Wegener’s granulomatosis. The diagnosis of
PG is primarily clinical and by exclusion of other causes of cutaneous
ulcerations with a similar appearance; skin histology may help.
Treatment is usually with immunosuppressants and corticosteroids.

A 72-year-old patient complains of recurrent episodes of loss of function
of the left upper limb lasting for a few minutes to an hour with 90%
stenosis of both internal carotid arteries. Choose the most appropriate
treatment option from the list below.
A. Right carotid endarterectomy
B. Left carotid endarterectomy
C. Right carotid artery stenting
D. Left carotid artery stenting
E. No surgical/endovascular intervention.

ANSWER IS A
In this case, the 90% stenosis of the right carotid artery correlates with
recurrent transient loss or impairment of function in the contralateral
(left) upper limb. Since symptoms that correlate with significant
impairment of the left carotid artery are not being experienced, most
surgeons would consider it appropriate, in a patient of this age, to carry
out endarterectomy of the right carotid artery only.



107
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 79-year-old patient has made a good recovery from a right-sided
cerebrovascular accident and has been found to have a complete
occlusion of the right and a 40% stenosis of the left internal carotid
artery. Choose the most appropriate treatment option from the list
below.
A. Right carotid endarterectomy
B. Left carotid endarterectomy
C. Right carotid artery stenting
D. Left carotid artery stenting
E. No surgical/endovascular intervention.

ANSWER IS E
When assessing patients for carotid surgery, it is important to make sure
that their symptoms correlate with the significantly stenosed side. This is
not the case in this patient. Carotid endarterectomy is performed to
prevent stroke secondary to embolisation for carotid plaque. If the artery
is occluded, there is no flow and there can therefore be no embolisation.
Surgery is thus not indicated for occluded internal carotid arteries.

An 80-year-old patient complains of amaurosis fugax in the left eye with
an 80% stenosis of the right and a 50% stenosis of the left internal
carotid artery. Choose the most appropriate treatment option from the
list below.
A. Right carotid endarterectomy
B. Left carotid endarterectomy
C. Right carotid artery stenting
D. Left carotid artery stenting
E. No surgical/endovascular intervention.

ANSWER IS E
In this case, the symptoms are not in the territory of the significantly
stenosed carotid artery. It is important to remember that amaurosis
fugax (transient, sudden loss of vision) should occur on the same side
as the significantly diseased artery, whilst sensory or motor loss in the
limbs should occur contralateral to the diseased artery.

A 78-year-old lifelong smoker presents with a punched out deep ulcer on
the dorsam of his foot. On examination the foot is cool and hairless and
sensation is reduced. The Dorsalis Pedis and Posterior Tibial pulse are
difficult to feel. What is the likely aetiology? Select one answer only.
A. Arterial
108
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


B. Diabetic
C. Infective
D. Malignant
E. Venous.

ANSWER IS A
This patient has peripheral arterial disease with typical deep punched
out ulcers. The limb has signs of chronic ischaemia with absent pulses.
These ulcers usually occur in pressure areas such as the ball of the foot
or heel.

A 59-year-old man presents with ulceration over the tips of his toes in his
left foot and a large ulcer over his right heel. He also complains of
paraesthesias in both feet. The ankle–brachial pressure indices are 1.05
on the right and 1.2 on the left. On neurological assessment,
proprioception and vibration sense are reduced. Select the most
appropriate diagnosis for this case.
A. Squamous cell carcinoma
B. Hypertensive ulcer (Martorell syndrome)
C. Pyoderma gangrenosum
D. Neuropathic ulcer
E. Vasculitic ulcer

ANSWER IS D
Neuropathic ulcers can result from peripheral sensory neuropathy
secondary to diabetes mellitus. The other causes of altered sensory
neuropathy leading to neuropathic ulcers include spinal cord injuries,
spina bifida, tabes dorsalis, syringomyelia, alcohol abuse and leprosy.
Neuropathic ulcers are common at the sites of pressure or repeated
trauma. The usual sites in the lower limb are the heads of the
metatarsals, the interdigital clefts, the heel (calcaneum) and the lateral
malleolus. In diabetic patients, the ankle–brachial pressure indices may
be falsely elevated even in those with major vessel disease. This is due
to calcification of the vessel walls and medial sclerosis. Neurological
assessment may reveal altered sensation including proprioception and
two-point discrimination in the foot or toes, reduced vibration sense and
absent ankle jerks.

A 21-year-old motorcyclist presents with multiple injuries following a road
traffic accident. Clinical examination reveals a critically ischaemic right
lower leg. The right dorsalis pedis pulse is weak. His right calf is tense
109
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


and swollen. The intracompartmental pressure is 55 mmHg.
Angiography shows no discontinuity of the arterial tree. Select the most
likely single treatment for this case.
A. Below-knee amputation
B. Fasciotomy
C. Femorodistal bypass
D. Femoropopliteal bypass
E. Lifestyle changes only

ANSWER IS B
The fifth patient has compartment syndrome. Urgent fasciotomy is
indicated in order to save his right leg.

A 76-year-old woman attends for review of an ulcer that appeared 2
weeks ago over the medial aspect of her lower left leg. This is shallow
with sloping edges. On examination there is hyperpigmentation of
surrounding skin. She takes warfarin for a previous recurrent DVT. What
is the likely diagnosis? Select one answer only.
A. Arterial Ulcer
B. Marjolin’s Ulcer
C. Post-Phelbitic Ulcer
D. Neuropathic Ulcer
E. Vasculitic Ulcer

ANSWER IS C
This patient has a venous ulcer as a consequence of poor venous flow
after previous DVT. The hyperpigmentation is lipodermatosclerosis from
haemosiderin deposition. Typically venous ulceration affects the ‘gaiter’
area in the lower medial third of the lower limb. The ulcers have gently
sloping edges, are shallow and flat with granulation tissue with healing
or slough on the base.

A 78-year-old lifelong smoker presents with a punched out deep ulcer on
the dorsam of his foot. On examination the foot is cool and hairless and
sensation is reduced. The Dorsalis Pedis and Posterior Tibial pulse are
difficult to feel. What is the likely aetiology? Select one answer only.
A. Arterial
B. Diabetic
C. Infective
D. Malignant
E. Venous.
110
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS A
This patient has peripheral arterial disease with typical deep punched
out ulcers. The limb has signs of chronic ischaemia with absent pulses.
These ulcers usually occur in pressure areas such as the ball of the foot
or heel.

A 38 year old man is playing football when he slips over during a tackle.
His knee is painful immediately following the fall. Several hours later he
notices that the knee has become swollen. Following a course of non
steroidal anti inflammatory drugs and rest the situation improves.
However, complains of recurrent pain. On assessment in clinic you
notice that it is impossible to fully extend the knee, although the patient
is able to do so when asked. What is the most likely injury?
Anterior cruciate ligament rupture
Posterior cruciate ligament rupture
Torn meniscus
Medial collateral ligament tear
Chondromalacia patellae

ANSWER IS C
Twisting sporting injuries followed by delayed onset of knee swelling and
locking are strongly suggestive of a menisceal tear. Arthroscopic
menisectomy is the usual treatment.

The medical team ask you to review a patient on the ward who has
developed a swollen painful pale oedematous leg. Looking through the
notes you see the patient was diagnosed with a deep vein thrombosis
last week. Pulses are present. Which is the likely diagnosis? Select one
answer only.
A. Atherosclerotic Ischaemia
B. Deep Vein Thrombosis
C. LymphodemaTarda
D. Phlegmasia Alba Dolens
E. Phelgmasia Cerulea Dolens.

ANSWER IS D
This condition is related to extensive complicated deep vein thrombosis.
The deep venous system is totally occluded and must rely on the
superficial venous system. However, this superficial system is now under
pressure of high flow from the arterial system which leads to a painful

111
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


oedematous white leg (‘alba’ meaning white). If this progresses all
venous outflow is occluded leading to cerulean dolens – here the arterial
supply is impeded and ischaemia and gangrene occur. Thrombolysis is
an effective treatment but needs to be undertaken with caution

A 15-year-old girl attends the vascular clinic with recent right leg
swelling. On examination she has confluent swelling to the thigh with
pitting oedema. Examination of the groin and abdomen is unremarkable,
as is ultrasound of the abdomen and groin. Lymphatic abnormality was
seen on lymphoscintigraphy. Which is the likely diagnosis? Select one
answer only.
A. Kippel-Trenaunay Syndrome
B. Lymphoedema Praecox
C. LymphodemaTarda
D. Milroy Disease
E. Secondary Lymphoedema.

ANSWER IS B
This is primary lymphoedema that occurs after puberty and before the
age of 35 years. It is more common in females than males. It is the
recent diagnosis in the 15 year old female which makes this diagnosis
most likely in this female along with any obvious aetiology. Kippel-
Trenaunay Syndrome causes limb hypertrophy - characterised with a
capillary haemangioma, venous malformations and varicosities that can
be superficial or deep involving muscle, bone and viscera and limb
abnormalities with limb lengthening.Lymphoedema Praecox, Tarda and
Milroy Disease are all example of primary lymphoedema. Milroy is
congentiallymphoedema. Praecox occurs before the age of 35 and
usually around puberty. Tarda is primary lymphoedema occurring after
the age of 35. Secondary lymphoedema occurs as a consequence of
another aetiology or surgery.

A 79-year-old woman presents with an ulcer over the medial aspect of
her lower right leg. Although she has had this for months, recently it has
become increasingly painful. The edges of the ulcer have become raised
and thickened. What is the most likely diagnosis? Select one answer
only.
A. Marjolin’s Ulcer
B. Post-Phlebitic Ulcer
C. Traumatic Ulcer


112
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


D. Vascular Ulcer
E. Vasculitic Ulcer.

 ANSWER IS A
This is a Marjolin’s Ulcer, in which a chronic venous ulcer has
undergone malignant change. This is a type of squamous cell carcinoma
and is diagnosed by the description of change in a longstanding ulcer
that is tender with thickened edges. Diagnosis is by biopsy.

The medical team ask for a vascular opinion on a 62 year old woman
who has lower limb ulceration and a persistent cough. On examination,
multiple ulcerations that are irregular, friable with an undermined edge
and a bluish tinge are seen on both lower limbs. Pulses are present.
CXR shows a cavitational lesion in the right upper lobe. What is the
likely aetiology of these ulcers? Select one answer only.
A. Arterial
B. Infective
C. Post-Phlebitic
D. Vasculitis
E. Venous.

ANSWER IS B
This patient has Tuberculosis. Usually respiratory or bone disease is
concurrent. The description of the ulcers are typical for tuberculous
ulceration.

A worried mother brings her child to see you. He has just started walking
and she has noticed that he has a gait abnormality as his right leg
appears longer than the other. He has prominent varicosities on his right
leg and a bluish ‘port-wine stain’ on his face. What is the likely
diagnosis? Select one answer only.
A. Deep Vein Thrombosis
B. Kippel-Trenaunay Syndrome
C. Milroy Disease
D. Popliteal Aneurysm
E. Secondary Lymphoedema.

 ANSWER IS B
The aetiology of this condition is unknown characterised with a capillary
haemangioma, venous malformations and varicosities that can be

113
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


superficial or deep involving muscle, bone and viscera and limb
abnormalities with limb lengthening or limb hypertrophy. Treatment is
symptomatic

A 28-year-old man of Chinese origin with a history of calf pain induced
by exercise presents to The Emergency Department with gangrene of
the left great toe. He reports a history of preceding calf pain induced by
exercise. He is a heavy smoker, but has no other risk factors for
atherosclerosis. Examination reveals absent pedal pulses on the
affected side. Select the most likely diagnosis for this case.
A. Atherosclerosis
B. Buerger’s disease
C. Chronic venous insufficiency
D. Degenerative joint disease
E. Deep venous thrombosis

ANSWER IS B
Buerger’s disease (thromboangiitis obliterans) almost exclusively affects
young men in their early 20s or 30s who are heavy smokers. It is
particularly common in men of Jewish, Arab, Indian and Chinese origin.
It has previously been considered as a variant of accelerated
atherosclerosis but most now regard it as a separate disease process. It
involves progressive obliteration of distal, medium-sized arteries of the
lower limb, characterised by transmural round cell infiltration associated
with intimal proliferation. Collagen is laid down around the vessels,
encasing them in a thick fibrous coat. Patients usually present with distal
gangrene, often preceded by a history of claudication. Popliteal pulses
are usually preserved, but pedal pulses are absent. Arteriography shows
normal proximal vessels and distal occlusions with ‘corkscrew’
collaterals. Biopsy of the occluded vessel provides histological
confirmation of the diagnosis.

A 54-year-old woman is referred to clinic with limb pain. She describes a
dull ache that is worse at the end of the day, and that affects the right
side more than the left. She has a past history of deep venous
thrombosis. On examination, varicose veins are evident in the
distribution of the long sapheous system, and there is brown
pigmentation of the skin of the lower third of both legs. There is also a
small ulcer superior to the medial malleolus. Select the most likely
diagnosis for this case.
A. Atherosclerosis

114
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


B. Buerger’s disease
C. Chronic venous insufficiency
D. Degenerative joint disease
E. Deep venous thrombosis

ANSWER IS C
Chronic venous insufficiency describes a spectrum of disease of the
lower limb veins in which venous return is chronically impaired by reflux,
obstruction, or calf pump failure. This results in sustained venous
hypertension, which is associated with clinical complications such as
oedema, eczema, lipodermatosclerosis and ulceration. Varicose veins
are usually characteristic of this condition, and provide visual
confirmation of venous reflux. However, the absence of visible varicose
veins does not exclude the presence of significant superficial reflux. The
pain associated with this condition tends to be worse following prolonged
periods of standing (gravitational effects/calf pump not functional), and is
relieved by rest and elevation of the affected limb. In the case described
(and most commonly) the insufficiency is secondary to previous venous
obstruction of the deep veins by thrombosis (DVT).

A 32-year-old man with a long history of intravenous drug abuse attends
The Emergency Department with a 4-h history of very severe pain in his
left leg. On examination, the patient is in sinus rhythm. The limb is pale
and cold compared to the other side, and only the femoral pulse is
present. Pulses are normal contralaterally. Select the most likely
diagnosis for this case.
A. Buerger’s disease
B. Chronic venous insufficiency
C. Degenerative joint disease
D. Deep venous thrombosis
E. Embolus

ANSWER IS E
The scenario describes several of the classic clinical features associated
with acute limb ischaemia as a result of arterial embolism (pain,
paraesthesia, paralysis, pale, perishing with cold, pulseless). An
embolus is the passage of matter from one part of the circulation to
another through a vascular lumen. The commonest sources of arterial
emboli arise in the heart (thrombus in atrial appendage secondary to
atrial fibrillation), from mural thrombus on a myocardial infarct, from
aneurysms and atherosclerotic plaques. Peripheral emboli may also

115
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


arise from the heart valves. Previously, acute endocarditis on a
rheumatic heart valve was an important source, but is now rare. More
commonly, peripheral emboli occur secondary to acute bacterial
endocarditis after intravenous drug abuse with contaminated needles, as
in the clinical case described

A 65-year-old man presents with intermittent claudication of the left calf.
His claudication distance is 50 yards (~45 m). Angiography
demonstrates a 1.5-cm stenosis of the left superficial femoral artery.
Select the most likely single treatment for this case.
A. Below-knee amputation
B. Fasciotomy
C. Femorodistal bypass
D. Femoropopliteal bypass
E. Percutaneous balloon angioplasty

ANSWER IS E
Percutaneous balloon angioplasty is particularly suitable for localised
stenoses and short occlusions. Lesions in the larger proximal vessels
(above knee) are technically easier to treat, with fewer complications
and better long-term results.

A 57-year-old woman with varicose veins presents with a large ulcer
over her left medial malleolus. This is associated with surrounding
lipodermatosclerosis and eczema. The ankle–brachial pressure index in
this leg is 1. The patient is moderately obese. Select the most
appropriate diagnosis for this case.
A. Neuropathic ulcer
B. Vasculitic ulcer
C. Venous ulcer
D. Basal cell carcinoma
E. Erythema nodosum.

ANSWER IS C
Venous ulcers may develop spontaneously or following minor trauma.
There may be a history of varicose veins, deep venous thrombosis,
chronic venous insufficiency, poor calf-muscle function or arteriovenous
fistulae. Other factors predisposing to venous ulceration include obesity,
all risk factors for deep-vein thrombosis, a family history of varicose
veins and a history of leg fracture. In long-term venous insufficiency, the
skin undergoes changes (atrophy and variable pigmentation), with the
116
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


dermis and subcutaneous tissue becoming indurated and fibrosed; this
is termed lipodermatosclerosis. Venous eczema (erythema, scaling,
weeping and itching) is a common feature associated with such
ulceration; this is distinct from cellulitis. The ankle–brachial pressure
indices are normal in patients with classic venous ulceration.

A 73-year-old diabetic presents with critical ischaemia of the right lower
leg. Angiography reveals extensive disease of the superficial femoral,
popliteal and tibial arteries. Pulse-generated, run-off assessment
indicates a good run-off in the posterior tibial artery. Select the most
likely single treatment for this case.
A. Below-knee amputation
B. Fasciotomy
C. Femorodistal bypass
D. Femoropopliteal bypass
E. Percutaneous balloon angioplasty.

ANSWER IS C
Femorodistal bypass using an autogenous vein graft is the treatment of
choice in the second patient. Absence of contrast in the posterior tibial,
anterior tibial and common peroneal arteries on angiography films must
not be accepted as evidence of their occlusion.

A 72-year-old man presents with a 4-hour history of acute ischaemia of
the left leg. Clinical examination demonstrates signs of acute ischaemia
with no evidence of gangrene, mottling or neurological deficit. An urgent
angiogram reveals a complete thrombotic occlusion of the distal
superficial femoral artery. Select the most likely single treatment for this
case.
A. Tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) infusion (intra-arterial)
B. Fasciotomy
C. Femorodistal bypass
D. Femoropopliteal bypass
E. Percutaneous balloon angioplasty.

ANSWER IS A
Intra-arterial thrombolysis with TPA is the treatment of choice in the third
patient in view of the short history (4 hours), angiographic findings and
absence of neurological deficit.



117
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


A 57-year-old smoker has a history of intermittent claudication of his
right calf. His claudication distance is 0.5 mile (~0.8 km). Angiography
reveals a 12-cm stenosis in the proximal superficial femoral artery. This
has had no effect on his lifestyle, work or social activities. Select the
most likely single treatment for this case.
A. Below-knee amputation
B. Fasciotomy
C. Femorodistal bypass
D. Femoropopliteal bypass
E. Lifestyle changes only
                                 ANSWER IS E
    The initial treatment of intermittent claudication is correction of risk
factors, such as diabetes, hypertension, smoking and exercise. Younger
       non-smokers should have a thrombotic screen performed on
    presentation. Critical ischaemia is defined by rest-pain of at least 2
  weeks’ duration that requires regular adequate analgesia, or ulceration
 or gangrene of the foot or toes with an ankle pressure of < 50 mmHg or
                        a toe pressure of < 30 mmHg


A 64-year-old smoker attends for review due to intermittent pain in the
back of the right calf on walking. After 30 yards she needs to stop and
rest to ease the pain. Which is her likely ABPI value? Select one answer
only.
A. >1
B. 1
C. 0.95 – 0.5
D. 0.5 – 0.3
E. <0.2.

ANSWER IS C
This patient has intermittent claudication. Ankle Brachial Pressure Index
(ABPI) aids assessment of peripheral arterial disease and aids the
assessment of severity in the legs. ANKLE BP systolic / Brachial BP
Systolic = ABPI >1 common in diabetic patients due to calcified arteries
obscuring the true result so is unreliable.
1 Normal
2. 0.95 -0.5 Intermittent Claudication
3. 0.5 -0.3 Rest Pain
4. <0.2 Gangrene.



118
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


you are called to see an 8-year-old girl admitted overnight following an
emergency open reduction and internal fixation of her right
supracondylar fracture. She is complaining of severe pain and tingling in
her right hand. On examination there is pain on passive flexion of the
hand. Which is the likely diagnosis? Select one answer only.
A. Arteriovenous Malformation
B. Axillary Vein Thrombosis
C. Axillary Artery Aneurysm
D. Compartment Syndrome
E. Secondary Lymphoedema.

ANSWER IS D
This occurs when tissue pressure in a closed muscle compartment is
greater than the perfusion pressure and leads to muscle and nerve
ischemia. This can readily occur after supracondylar fractures. Passive
flexion of the muscle induces pain is a reliable sign. Pressure in the
compartment must be released. In this case you must immediately split
the hard plaster of paris cast to reduce the pressure on the limb.
However, if this does not help the symptoms, the patient would require
an urgentfasciotomy to release the muscle compartment pressure.
Serious consequences arise if compartment syndrome is missed with
necrosis of the nerve and muscles resulting in ischaemic contractures –
in the upper limb this is classically Volkmann’s Ischemic Contracture.

Which of the following is not linked to excess glucocorticoids?
Osteonecrosis
Osteoporosis
Hypokalaemia
Hyponatraemia
Growth retardation in children

ANSWER IS D
There are many adverse effects associated with excess glucocorticoids.
Thinning of the skin, osteonecrosis and osteoporosis are all common.
Steroids are associated with retention of sodium and water. Potassium
loss may occur and hypokalaemic alkalosis has been reported.

A 23 year old woman presents with greenish nipple discharge on one
occasion. Clinical examination of the breast is normal. Ultrasound report
is U1. What is the best course of action?

119
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Arrange a mammogram
Undertake a total duct excision
Undertake a microdochectomy
Reassure and discharge
Express duct fluid for cytology

ANSWER IS D
Undertaking cytology of nipple discharge fluid is unhelpful and adds very
little to management.

This is likely to be simple duct ectasia and U1 (normal USS) coupled
with normal examination would favor discharge from clinic.
Mammography is generally unhelpful in this age group.

Which cranial nerve supplies the motor fibres of styloglossus?
Facial
Trigeminal
Vagus
Hypoglossal
Glossopharyngeal

ANSWER IS D
The hypoglossal nerve supplies motor innervation to all extrinsic and
intrinsic muscles of the tongue. The only possible exception to this is
palatoglossus, which is jointly innervated by the vagus and accessory
nerves.

Considering cluster randomised trials, which of the following statements
is false?
They consider interventions targeted at groups
They require increased recruitment to achieve the same level of
statistical power as individual trials
If results are analysed on an individual basis a lower P value may be
obtained
They are less prone to unit of analyses errors than trials involving
individual observations
The statistical analyses for these trials is more complex than that
required for trials based on individuals


120
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS D
Cluster randomised trials are more prone to unit of analyses errors than
individual based trials. Clustering needs to be considered in trial design
and data analysis. One of the commonest errors is where a study is a
cluster study but researchers have failed to recognise this fact. This will
then result in the incorrect analysis being pursued. A lower P value will
then result and a false positive error will occur.

A 78 year old man presents with a ruptured aortic aneurysm. This is
repaired but the operation is difficult as it has a juxtarenal location. A
supra renal cross clamp is applied. Post operatively he is found to be
oliguric and acute renal failure is suspected. Which of the following
statements relating to acute post-operative renal failure are untrue?
Intravenous dopamine does not prevent acute renal failure.
It is more common after emergency surgery.
Use of excessive amounts of intravenous fluids may lead to falsely
normal serum creatinine measurements.
Vasopressor drugs have a strong renoprotective effect
It is minimised by normalisation of haemodynamic status.

ANSWER IS D
Vasopressor use is linked to renal failure as they are a marker of
haemodynamic compromise.

A 48 year old motor cyclist sustains a complex lower limb fracture in a
motor accident. For a time the popliteal artery is occluded and eventually
repaired. Subsequently he develops a compartment syndrome and the
anterior and superficial posterior compartments of the lower leg are
decompressed. Unfortunately, the operating surgeon neglects to
decompress the deep posterior compartment. Which of the following
muscles is least likely to be affected as a result?
Flexor digitorum longus
Plantaris
Tibialis posterior
Flexor hallucis longus
None of the above

ANSWER IS B



121
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A



Muscles of the deep posterior compartment:
Tibialis posterior
Flexor hallucis longus
Flexor digitorum longus
Popliteus
The plantaris muscle lies within the superficial posterior compartment of
the lower leg.

Which of the following is a content of the adductor canal?
Saphenous nerve
Sural nerve
Femoral nerve
Profunda branch of the femoral artery
Saphenous vein

 ANSWER IS A
It contains the saphenous nerve and the superficial branch of the
femoral artery.

A 65 year old man presents with a 5cm ulcerated area over his medial
malleolus. It has been present for many years and the nurses have
complained that it is not healing with simple bandages. What is the best
course of action?
Perform a core biopsy
Perform a punch biopsy
Arrange a split thickness skin graft
Undertake an incisional biopsy
Arrange for wide surgical excision and skin grafting

 ANSWER IS B
This is likely to be a venous ulcer and should usually be managed with
compression bandaging if there is no arterial compromise. Long
standing lesions may be complicated by the development of malignancy
and for this reason a punch biopsy of long standing or non healing
lesions is advisable.

A baby is found to have a Klumpke's palsy post delivery. Which of the
following is most likely to be present?

122
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Loss of flexors of the wrist
Weak elbow flexion
Pronation of the forearm
Adducted shoulder
Shoulder medially rotated

 ANSWER IS A
A C8, T1 root lesion is called Klumpke's paralysis and is caused by
delivery with the arm extended.

During an open Watsons Fundoplication, the inferior pole of the spleen
is injured causing troublesome bleeding. What is the best course of
action?
Removal of the entire spleen
Partial splenectomy
Use of argon plasma coagulation system
Sutured splenorrhaphy
Sutured ligation of the splenic hilar vessels

ANSWER IS C
The argon plasma coagulation system is very good for managing splenic
bleeding. Alternatives include topical haemostatic agents. Its not
necessary to ligate the hilar vessels, if this is required, a splenectomy is
the usual outcome.

A 54 year old lady has her serum calcium measured. Assuming her
renal function is normal, what proportion of calcium filtered at the
glomerulus will be reabsorbed by the renal tubules?
5%
15%
25%
50%
95%

ANSWER IS E
Most filtered calcium is reabsorbed (95%) a rare disorder of familial
hypocalcemic calciurea may affect this proportion.



123
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A 22 year old man is undergoing an abdominal ultrasound scan as part
of a series of investigations for abdominal pain. The radiologist notes
that there is evidence of splenic atrophy. What is the most likely cause?
Letterer-Siwe disease
Coeliac disease
Malaria
Niemann-Pick disease
Sarcoidosis

ANSWER IS B
 Splenic atrophy may occur in coeliac disease together with the
appearance of Howell-Jolly bodies in erythrocytes. Letterer - Siwe
disease is a form of Histiocytosis X in which macrophages proliferate.
A 68 year old man presents with an ulcerated lesion on his right cheek. It
is excised and on histological assessment a squamous cell carcinoma is
diagnosed. It measures 25mm in diameter and is 4mm deep. Which of
the following statements relating to this condition is false?
In this particular case margins of at least 6mm are required
Use of cryosurgery to treat this patients lesion would have been unsafe
Use of radiotherapy to treat this lesion would have been unsafe
This patients local recurrence rate may approach 15%
The disease usually spreads via lymphatics

ANSWER IS C
Poor prognostic factors in SCC:
Size >20mm (local recurrence rate of up to 15%)
Depth greater than 4mm (risk of metastasis up to 30%)

This man has an SCC with significant risk of metastasis. Although
cryotherapy may be used to treat SCC it would be most unsafe in this
setting as the lesion extends deeply. However, radiotherapy is a safe
treatment modality for SCC and may be used in selected cases. It is
unwise to use radiotherapy in areas prone to radionecrosis e.g. the
nose.

A 40 year old man presents with a long standing inguinal hernia. On
examination he has a small, direct inguinal hernia. He inquires as to the
risk of strangulation over the next twelve months should he decide not to
undergo surgery. Which of the following most closely matches the likely
risk of strangulation over the next 12 months?
124
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


50%
40%
25%
15%
<5%

ANSWER IS E
The annual probability of strangulation is up to 3% and is more common
in indirect hernias. Elective repair poses few risks. However, emergency
repair is associated with increased mortality, particularly in the elderly.

A 72 year old lady falls and lands on her left hip. She attends the
emergency department and is given some paracetamol by the junior
doctor and discharged. Several months later she presents with ongoing
pain and discomfort of the hip. Avascular necrosis of the femoral head is
suspected. Which of the following features is least likely to be present?
Union of the fracture
Angiogenesis at the fracture site
Increased numbers of fibroblasts at the fracture site
Osteochondritis dissecans
Apoptosis of osteoblasts

ANSWER IS E
Apoptosis is not a feature of necrotic cell death. By this stage there
would usually be attempted repair so angiogenesis and proliferation of
fibroblasts would be expected. These cells may differentiate further to
become osteoblasts which in turn will lay down new matrix.

What is the mechanism of action of ciprofloxacin?
Inhibition of DNA gyrase
Direct injury to the bacterial cell wall
Osmotic damage to the cell
Inhibition of reverse transcriptase
Destruction of bacterial aquaporin proteins
ANSWER IS A

A baby boy is born by elective cesarean section at 39 weeks gestation.
He initially seems to progress well and is discharged from hospital the
following day. The parents bring the child to the clinic at 10 days of age
125
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


and are concerned at the presence of a profuse and foul smelling
discharge at the site of the umbilicus. On examination, the umbilicus has
some prominent granulation tissue. When the baby cries a small trickle
of brownish fluid is seen to pass from the umbilicus. What is the most
likely cause?
Omphalitis
Patent vitello-intestinal duct
Patent urachus
Pyogenic granuloma
Umbilical hernia

ANSWER IS B
A persistent vitello-intestinal duct may allow the persistent and ongoing
discharge of small bowel content from the umbilicus. This fluid may be
very irritant to the surrounding skin.

A 53 year old male presents with a carcinoma of the transverse colon.
Which of the following structures should be ligated close to their origin to
maximise clearance of the tumour?
Superior mesenteric artery
Inferior mesenteric artery
Middle colic artery
Ileo-colic artery
Superior rectal artery

ANSWER IS C
The middle colic artery supplies the transverse colon and requires high
ligation during cancer resections. It is a branch of the superior
mesenteric artery.

A 73 year old lady is admitted with a brisk rectal bleed. She is otherwise
well and the bleed settles. On examination, her abdomen is soft and non
tender. Elective colonoscopy shows a small erythematous lesion in the
right colon, but no other abnormality. What is the likely cause?
Diverticular bleed
Angiodysplasia
Colonic cancer
Ischaemia
Infective colitis

ANSWER IS B

126
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Angiodysplasia can be difficult to identify and treat. The colonoscopic
stigmata are easily missed by poor bowel preparation.

A 23 year old man falls over whilst intoxicated and a shard of glass
transects his median nerve at the proximal border of the flexor
retinaculum. His tendons escape injury. Which of the following features
is least likely to be present?
Weakness of thumb abduction
Loss of sensation on the dorsal aspect of the thenar eminence
Loss of power of opponens pollicis
Adduction and lateral rotation of the thumb at rest
Loss of power of abductor pollicis brevis
 ANSWER IS B
he median nerve may be injured proximal to the flexor retinaculum. This
will result in loss of abductor pollicis brevis, flexor pollicis brevis,
opponens pollicis and the first and second lumbricals. When the patient
is asked to close the hand slowly there is a lag of the index and middle
fingers reflecting the impaired lumbrical muscle function. The sensory
changes are minor and do not extend to the dorsal aspect of the thenar
eminence.
Abductor pollicis longus will contribute to thumb abduction (and is
innervated by the posterior interosseous nerve) and therefore abduction
will be weaker than prior to the injury.

Which of the following structures accompanies the posterior
interventricular artery within the posterior interventricular groove?
Great cardiac vein
Middle cardiac vein
Small cardiac vein
Anterior cardiac vein
Coronary sinus

ANSWER IS B
Which one of the following is least associated with the development of
colorectal cancer in patients with ulcerative colitis?
Unremitting disease
Disease duration > 10 years
Onset before 15 years old
Poor compliance to treatment
Disease confined to the rectum


127
                                                                    MCQS MRCS-A


Which of the following statements relating to sartorius is untrue?
It is supplied by the femoral nerve
It forms the lateral boundary of the femoral triangle
The middle third forms the roof of the adductor canal
It is a flexor of the hip and knee
It inserts into the medial femoral condyle

ANSWER IS E
It inserts into the medial aspect of the upper part of the tibia.

In Intention to treat analysis, which statement is untrue?
It is based on the initial treatment intended.
Excludes those who cross over to alternative treatment arms of a trial.
Is different from a per protocol analysis.
Will affect the statistical power calculation to compare outcomes of
treatment.
Helps to minimise observer bias.

ANSWER IS B
An intention to treat analysis considers data according to the treatment
to which the patient was randomised, rather than the treatment which
was recieved.

It includes those who cross over which is how it helps provide additional
information relating to those groups.

The acute phase response to injury does not typically include:
Pyrexia
Decreased albumin
Hepatic sequestration of cations
Increased transferrin
Increased serum amyloid A

ANSWER IS D
Acute phase proteins
Reduction of transport proteins (albumin, transferrin)
Hepatic sequestration cations
Pyrexia
Neutrophil leucocytosis
128
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Increased muscle proteolysis
Changes in vascular permeability

A 73 year old man presents to pre operative clinic for an elective total
hip replacement. He is on furosemide for hypertension. His
investigations reveal to the following results:
Na 120
Urine Na 10 (low)
Serum osmolality 280 (normal)
What is the most likely cause?
Hypotonic hypovolaemic hyponatraemia
Hypertonic hypovolaemic hyponatraemia
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
Over administration of 5% dextrose
Glomerulonephritis

ANSWER IS A
The blood results reflect extra-renal sodium loss. The body is trying to
preserve the sodium by not allowing any sodium into the urine (hence
the low Na in the urine). Note with renal sodium loss the Urinary sodium
is high.

A 62 year old male attends the hernia clinic. He suddenly develops
speech problems, left facial weakness and left sided arm and leg
weakness lasting longer than 5 minutes. A CT head shows no
intracerebral bleed. What is the next line of management?
Aspirin 300mg
Aspirin 75 mg
Clopidogrel 300mg
Urgent referral for thrombolysis
Carotid endarterectomy

ANSWER IS D
This patient is within 3h of symptom onset of a stroke. Therefore he
should be urgently referred to the medical team for thrombolysis, before
Aspirin is given. There are concerns that high dose aspirin would
increase the risk of intracerebral haemorrhage if thrombolysis is
undertaken.
This is an example of the type of medical problem you should be aware
of as a surgeon, as ultimately you can make a difference by referring
QUICKLY to the correct specialty for management.
129
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A



Which of the following is not usually required to make a power
calculation?
The specificity of the intervention being tested
The desired significance level
The size of the effect being measured
The desired power value
Sample size used to detect the effect

ANSWER IS A
The specificity of a test is related to type 1 errors.

The components that are nearly always needed for power calculations
are :
Size of effect
Significance level
Sample size used to detect the effect
Desired power value

Which of the following is not a direct branch of the facial nerve?
Greater petrosal nerve
Nerve to stapedius
Auriculotemporal
Chorda tympani
Buccal

ANSWER IS C
The auriculotemporal nerve is a direct branch of the mandibular nerve.
Other branches of the mandibular nerve include:
Lingual
Inferior alveolar
Nerve to the mylohyoid
Mental

Which of the following statements related to coronary artery bypass
surgery is true?
Late graft stenosis is mainly associated with saphenous vein grafts
Is indicated if there is stenosis > 70% of the right coronary artery
The left atrium is cannulated during the procedure

130
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


The CHADS score is used to assess peri operative risk
Cardioplegia is always undertaken at a 37 degrees

 ANSWER IS A
Indications are:

1. Left main stem stenosis or equivalent (proximal LAD and proximal
circumflex)
2. Triple vessel disease
3. Diffuse disease unsuitable for PCI
The right atrium is cannulated. The CHADS score assesses whether a
patient should be warfarinised if they have atrial fibrillation. Cardioplegia
can be undertaken at cold or warm temperatures.

A 77 year old man is admitted with large bowel obstruction and on
investigation with an abdominal CT scan is found to have an obstructing
cancer of the sigmoid colon. What is the most appropriate course of
action?
Laparotomy, sigmoid colectomy and formation of end colostomy
Laparotomy and loop colostomy
Laparotomy and loop ileostomy
Laparotomy, high anterior resection and colo-rectal anastomosis
Palliation

ANSWER IS A
Obstructing sigmoid cancers can be resected or stented. If stented, then
the patient may need definitive surgery later. If resected, then a
resection and end colostomy (Hartmann's ) procedure is usually
undertaken because of the risks of anastomotic leak in the setting of
anastomosing obstructed colon to rectum.

Which of the following is least likely to be associated with
hypercalcaemia?
Thiazides
Antacids
Coeliac disease
Sarcoidosis
Zolinger-Ellison syndrome


131
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS C
Patients with coeliac disease tend to develop hypocalcaemia due to
malabsorption of calcium by the bowel.

From which embryological structure is the ureter derived?
Uranchus
Cloaca
Vitello-intestinal duct
Mesonephric duct
None of the above

ANSWER IS D
The ureter develops from the mesonephric duct. The mesonephric duct
is associated with the metanephric duct that develops within the
metenephrogenic blastema. This forms the site of the ureteric bud which
branches off the mesonephric duct.

A 55 year old lady presents with discomfort in the right breast. On
clinical examination a small lesion is identified and clinical appearances
suggest fibroadenoma. Imaging confirms the presence of a
fibroadenoma alone. A core biopsy is taken, this confirms the presence
of the fibroadenoma. However, the pathologist notices that a small area
of lobular carcinoma in situ is also present in the biopsy. What is the
best management?
Whole breast irradiation
Simple mastectomy
Mastectomy and sentinal lymph node biopsy
Wide local excision and sentinel lymph node biopsy
Breast MRI scan

ANSWER IS E
Lobular carcinoma in situ has a low association with invasive
malignancy. It is seldom associated with microcalcification and therefore
MRI is the best tool for determining disease extent. Resection of in situ
disease is not generally recommended and most surgeons would simply
pursue a policy of close clinical and radiological follow up.




132
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


5 surgeons in a colorectal unit wish to determine whether there is a
significant difference in their individual leak rates for anterior resection of
the rectum. Which of the following investigations is most appropriate?
Paired T Test
Unpaired T test
Chi squared test
Fishers exact test
Kruskall Wallis test

ANSWER IS E
In this scenario the data is derived from 5 groups of surgeons. If the data
were normally distributed then an ANOVA could be considered. Since
these assumptions cannot be met, or satisfied by transforming the data
then the Kruskall-Wallis test provides a non parametric alternative. This
is essentially an extension of the Wilcoxon Rank sum test and detects
differences in median values between each group. To compare more
accurately differences between two individual surgeons a Mann Whitney
U test may be a more acceptable alternative.

A 55 year old man is found to have a carcinoma of the sigmoid colon on
screening colonoscopy. How should this be staged?
MRI of the abdomen and CT of the chest
Liver MRI and Chest CT
CT scanning of the chest, abdomen and pelvis alone
MRI of the rectum and CT of the abdomen and chest
Endoluminal USS and CT scanning of the abdomen

ANSWER IS C
Colonic cancers are staged with CT scanning of the chest, abdomen and
pelvis.

Rectal cancer is staged with MRI rectum (and sometimes endolumenal
USS for low T1 lesions) together with CT scanning of the chest,
abdomen and pelvis. Historically, colonic cancer was staged with liver
USS and CXR. However, modern imaging has made this practice
obsolete.

A 42 year old man presents with epigastric pain. At endoscopy, he is
found to have a punched out ulcer on the anterior wall of the stomach. It

133
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


is shallow and measures 1cm in diameter. What is the most likely
diagnosis?
Acute peptic ulcer
Chronic peptic ulcer
Adenocarcinoma
Lymphoma
Dieulafoy lesion

ANSWER IS A
The absence of fibrosis coupled with small size suggests a more acute
ulcer. Management should include biopsy, PPI and repeat endoscopy at
6 weeks.

A surgeon wishes to determine whether different methods of
perioperative shaving have an effect on post operative wound infection
rates. Which of the following is the best method for assessing whether
one method is better than the other?
Cohort study
Retrospective study
Case controlled study
Cross over study
Randomised controlled study

ANSWER IS E
A randomised controlled study is the best method for assessing this
relationship. It is important to analyse data from RCT's on an intention to
treat basis.

What is the most common cause of osteolytic bone metastasis in
children?
Osteosarcoma
Neuroblastoma
Leukaemia
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Nephroblastoma

ANSWER IS B



134
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


Neuroblastomas are a relatively common childhood tumour and have a
strong tendency to developing widespread lytic metastasis.

A 65 year old man presents with a 5cm ulcerated area over his medial
malleolus. It has been present for many years and the nurses have
complained that it is not healing with simple bandages. What is the best
course of action?
Perform a core biopsy
Perform a punch biopsy
Arrange a split thickness skin graft
Undertake an incisional biopsy
Arrange for wide surgical excision and skin grafting

ANSWER IS B
This is likely to be a venous ulcer and should usually be managed with
compression bandaging if there is no arterial compromise. Long
standing lesions may be complicated by the development of malignancy
and for this reason a punch biopsy of long standing or non healing
lesions is advisable.

A 19 year old man undergoes an open inguinal hernia repair. The cord is
mobilised and the deep inguinal ring identified. Which of the following
structures forms its lateral wall?
External oblique aponeurosis
Transversalis fascia
Conjoint tendon
Inferior epigastric artery
Inferior epigastric vein

ANSWER IS B
The transversalis fascia forms the superolateral edge of the deep
inguinal ring. The epigastric vessels form its inferomedial wall.

Which of the following is not included in Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia
Type 2b?
Phaeochromocytoma
Visceral ganglioneuromas
Thyroid medullary carcinoma

135
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Zollinger Ellison syndrome
Marfanoid features

ANSWER IS D
MEN IIB
Medullary thyroid cancer
Phaeochromocytoma
Mucosal neuroma
Marfanoid appearance

A 38 year old lady presents with right upper quadrant pain and nausea.
She is otherwise well and her only medical therapy is the oral
contraceptive pill which she has taken for many years with no ill effects.
Her liver function tests are normal. An ultrasound examination
demonstrates a hyperechoic well defined lesion in the left lobe of the
liver which measures 14 cm in diameter. What is the most probable
underlying cause?
Liver cell adenoma
Cavernous haemangioma
Mesenchymal hamartoma
Cystadenoma
Cholangiocarcinoma

ANSWER IS B
 Cavernous haemangioma often presents with vague symptoms and
signs. They may grow to considerable size. Liver function tests are
usually normal. The lesions are typically well defined and hyperechoic
on ultrasound. A causative link between OCP use and haemangiomata
has yet to be established, but is possible.

The cords of the brachial plexus are most closely related to which of the
following vessels?
Subclavian artery
Axillary artery
Axillary vein
Subclavian vein
Brachial artery

ANSWER IS B

136
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


The trunks are related to the subclavian artery superiorly. The cords of
the plexus surround the axillary artery, they are named according to their
positions relative to this structure.

A patient has a chest drain insertion. There is fresh blood at the chest
drain insertion area. Which vessel has been damaged?
Pericardiophrenic artery
Intercostal vein
Right ventricle
Vagus artery
Intercostal artery

ANSWER IS E
The intercostal vein is more superior than the artery and is thus slightly
less susceptible to injury.

Within the intercostal spaces there are thin, strong muscles, intercostal
vessels, nerves and lymphatics. There are 3 intercostal muscle layers
corresponding to the lateral abdominal wall; external, internal, innermost
intercostals. At the mid axillary line there are thin intracostals which is an
extension of the internal intercostal muscle. In each intercostal space
lies the neurovascular bundle, comprising, from superior to inferiorly; the
posterior intercostal vein, artery and nerve, lying protected in the
subcostal groove of the rib above and situated between the second and
third layer of the intercostal muscles. These blood vessels anastomose
anteriorly with the anterior intercostal vessels, which arise from the
internal thoracic artery and vein.
Which of the following cranial foramina pairings are incorrect?
Carotid canal and internal carotid artery.
Foramen ovale and mandibular nerve.
Optic canal and ophthalmic artery.
Optic canal and ophthalmic nerve.
Foramen rotundum and maxillary nerve.

ANSWER IS D
The optic canal transmits the optic nerve. The ophthalmic nerve
traverses the superior orbital fissure.

Of the list below, which is not a cause of avascular necrosis?

137
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


Steroids
Sickle cell disease
Radiotherapy
Myeloma
Caisson disease

ANSWER IS D
Causes of avascular necrosis
P ancreatitis
L upus
A lcohol
S teroids
T rauma
I diopathic, infection
C aisson disease, collagen vascular disease
R adiation, rheumatoid arthritis
A myloid
G aucher disease
S ickle cell disease

Steroid containing therapy for myeloma may induce avascular necrosis,
however the disease itself does not cause it. Caisson disease as may
occur in deep sea divers is a recognised cause.

The sciatic nerve lies deep to the following structures except:
Gluteus maximus
The femoral cutaneous nerve
Long head of biceps femoris
Gluteus medius
Branch of the inferior gluteal artery

ANSWER IS D
The gluteus medius does not extend around to the sciatic nerve.

A surgical team wish to conduct a meta analysis of randomised
controlled trials of the use of low molecular weight heparins in the
prevention of post operative deep vein thrombosis. How would these
results be best displayed graphically?



138
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


Forest plot
Box Whisker plot
Violin plot
Kaplan Meier graph
None of the above
ANSWER IS A
Data from multiple RCT's are best displayed using Forest plots. Funnel
plots may be used to determine the effect of small studies and their
overall effect on the data. Violin plots and Box Whisker plots are often
used to graphically display non parametric data from single studies and
are not generally used to display data from meta analyses.

A 59 year old man is undergoing an extended right hemicolectomy for a
carcinoma of the splenic flexure of the colon. The surgeons divide the
middle colic vein close to its origin. Into which of the following structures
does this vessel primarily drain?
Superior mesenteric vein
Portal vein
Inferior mesenteric vein
Inferior vena cava
Ileocolic vein

 ANSWER IS A
The middle colonic vein drains into the SMV, if avulsed during
mobilisation then dramatic haemorrhage can occur and be difficult to
control.

Which of the following drugs does not cause syndrome of inappropriate
anti diuretic hormone release?
Haloperidol
Carbamazepine
Amitriptylline
Cyclophosphamide
Methotrexate

ANSWER IS E
Drugs causing SIADH: ABCD
A nalgesics: opioids, NSAIDs
B arbiturates

139
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


C yclophosphamide/ Chlorpromazine/ Carbamazepine
D iuretic (thiazides)

A 22 year old man presents with symptoms of lethargy and bilateral
facial nerve palsy. On examination he has bilateral parotid gland
enlargement. What is the most likely cause?
Pleomorphic adenoma
Cerebrovascular accident
Sarcoidosis
Warthins tumour
Adenoid cystic carcinoma

ANSWER IS C
Facial nerve palsy is the commonest neurological manifestation of
sarcoid. It usually resolves. The absence of a discrete lesion on
palpation is against the other causes.

A 22 year old man is involved in a fight. He sustains a laceration to the
posterior aspect of his wrist. In the emergency department the wound is
explored and the laceration is found to be transversely orientated and
overlies the region of the extensor retinaculum, which is intact. Which of
the following structures is least likely to be injured in this scenario?
Dorsal cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve
Tendon of extensor indicis
Basilic vein
Superficial branch of the radial nerve
Cephalic vein

ANSWER IS B
The extensor retinaculum attaches to the radius proximal to the styloid,
thereafter it runs obliquely and distally to wind around the ulnar styloid
(but does not attach to it). The extensor tendons lie deep to the extensor
retinaculum and would therefore be less susceptible to injury than the
superficial structures.

A 22 year old man is involved in a fight and sustains a stab wound in his
upper forearm. On examination there is a small, but deep laceration.
There is an obvious loss of pincer movement involving the thumb and


140
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


index finger with minimal loss of sensation. The most likely nerve injury
is to the:
Ulnar nerve
Radial nerve
Anterior interosseous nerve
Axillary nerve
Median nerve

ANSWER IS C
The anterior interosseous nerve is a motor branch of the median nerve
just below the elbow. When damaged it classically causes:
Pain in the forearm
Loss of pincer movement of the thumb and index finger (innervates the
long flexor muscles of flexor pollicis longus & flexor digitorum profundus
of the index and middle finger)
Minimal loss of sensation due to lack of a cutaneous branch.

Which of the following is least likely to occur in association with severe
atrophic gastritis?
Gastric ulcers
Gastric cancer
Anaemia
Duodenal ulcers
Gastric polyps

ANSWER IS D
Achlorhydria would make the formation of duodenal ulcers unlikely. Note
the question states "least likely".
Due to the loss of gastric acid a duodenal ulcer is unlikely. Note that
gastric polyps may form.

A 56 year old lady is undergoing an adrenalectomy for Conns syndrome.
During the operation the surgeon damages the middle adrenal artery
and haemorrhage ensues. From which of the following structures does
this vessel originate?
Aorta
Renal artery
Splenic artery


141
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Coeliac axis
Superior mesenteric artery

ANSWER IS A
The middle adrenal artery is usually a branch of the aorta, the lower
adrenal artery typically arises from the renal vessels.

During a colonoscopy, a patient is found to have a colonic cancer in the
caecum and a 1cm polyp (which looks adenomatous) in the sigmoid
colon. What is the correct management of the sigmoid polyp?
Undertake a snare polypectomy
Leave in situ until the cancer has been resected
Perform a hot biopsy
Perform a cold biopsy
Resect the sigmoid at the same time as the cancer resection

ANSWER IS B
Dysplasia and cancer are not the same disease. All colonic adenomas
are dysplastic. Adenomas greater than 2cm may harbor foci of
malignancy within them. However, many have dysplastic cells only.
These do not require segmental resection.

When a cancer has been identified during endoscopy, it is safest to
avoid undertaking polyp interventions as there is a risk of seeding.

A 27 year old man sustains a single gunshot wound to the left thigh. In
the emergency department, he is noted to have a large haematoma of
his medial thigh. He complains of parasthesia in his foot. On
examination, there are weak pulses palpable distal to the injury and the
patient is unable to move his foot. The appropriate initial management of
this patient is:
Conventional angiography
Immediate exploration and repair
Fasciotomy of the anterior compartment
Observation for resolution of spasm
Local wound exploration

ANSWER IS B


142
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


The five P's of arterial injury include pain, parasthesias, pallor,
pulselessness and paralysis. In the extremities, the tissues most
sensitive to anoxia are the peripheral nerves and striated muscle. The
early developments of paresthesias and paralysis are signals that there
is significant ischemia present, and immediate exploration and repair are
warranted. The presence of palpable pulse does not exclude an arterial
injury because this presence may represent a transmitted pulsation
through a blood clot. When severe ischemia is present, the repair must
be completed within 6 to 8 h to prevent irreversible muscle ischemia and
loss of limb function. Delay to obtain a conventional angiogram or to
observe for change needlessly prolongs the ischemic time. A CT
angiogram may be a reasonable alternative. Fasciotomy may be
required but should be done in conjunction with and after re-
establishment of arterial flow. Local wound exploration is not
recommended because brisk hemorrhage may be encountered without
the securing of prior vascular control.

A 78 year old man presents with unilateral deafness which has been
present for the past 3 months. On examination, Webers test localises to
the contralateral side and a CT scan of his head shows a thickened
calvarium with areas of sclerosis and radiolucency. His blood tests show
an elevated alkaline phosphatase, normal serum calcium and normal
PTH levels. Which of the following is the most likely underlying
diagnosis?
Multiple myeloma with skull involvement
Osteoporosis
Pagets disease with skull involvement
Lung cancer with skull metastasis
Osteopetrosis with skull involvement

ANSWER IS C
 Of the conditions listed, Pagets disease is the most likely diagnosis
(skull vault expansion and sensorineural hearing loss). Multiple myeloma
would typically result in multiple areas of radiolucency and usually raised
calcium in this setting. Osteopetrosis is a recognised cause of the
features described. However, it is a rare inherited disorder and usually
presents in children in young adults. Presentation at this stage with no
prior symptoms would be extremely rare and therefore this is not the
most likely diagnosis.



143
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Which of the following nerves is not contained within the posterior
triangle of the neck?
Accessory nerve
Phrenic nerve
Greater auricular nerve
Ansa cervicalis
Lesser occiptal nerve

ANSWER IS D
Ansa cervicalis is a content of the anterior triangle of the neck.

A 44 year old man recieves a large volume transfusion of whole blood.
The whole blood is two weeks old. Which of the following best describes
its handling of oxygen?
It will have a low affinity for oxygen
Its affinity for oxygen is unchanged
It will more readily release oxygen in metabolically active tissues than
fresh blood
The release of oxygen in metabolically active tissues will be the same as
fresh blood
It will have an increased affinity for oxygen

ANSWER IS E
Stored blood has less 2,3 DPG and therefore has a higher affinity for
oxygen, this reduces its ability to release it at metabolising tissues.

Which of the following substances related to thyroid function has its
effects mediated by a nuclear receptor?
Triiodothyronine
Thyroxine
Thyroglobulin
Thyroid stimulating hormone
Thyroxin binding globulin
ANSWER IS A
T3 binds to a receptor on chromatin to induce protein synthesis.

A new test to screen for pulmonary embolism (PE) is used in 100
patients who present to the Emergency Department. The test is positive
in 30 of the 40 patients who are proven to have a PE. Of the remaining


144
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


60 patients, only 5 have a positive test. What is the sensitivity of the new
test?
8.33%
30%
40%
66.66%
75%

ANSWER IS E
A contingency table can be constructed from the above data, as shown
below:

{PE diagnosed}{No PE} {Test positive}305 {Test negative}1055
The sensitivity is therefore 30 / (30 + 10) = 75%

Which of the following local anaesthetics is not an amino amide type?
Lignocaine
Xylocaine
Procaine
Bupivacaine
Prilocaine

ANSWER IS C
All local anaesthetics have a chemical bond linking an amine to either an
amide or an ester. Most local anaesthetics are of the amino- amide
types, these have a more favorable side effect profile and are more
stable in solution. Procaine and benzocaine have amino - ester groups,
these are metabolised by pseudocholinesterases

A 5 year old suffers 20% burns to the torso. On examination, there is
fixed pigmentation and the affected area has a white and dry
appearance. Which of the following options represents the best
management plan?
Rotational myocutaneous flap
Full thickness skin graft
Excision and delayed primary closure
Split thickness skin graft
Excision and direct primary closure


145
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS D
This is a full thickness burn and will require split thickness skin grafting.
Meshing the graft may increase the donor site yield. However, this is at
the expense of cosmesis. The burn itself must be debrided first to
ensure an adequate wound bed.

An 28 year old man presents with a direct inguinal hernia. A decision is
made to perform an open inguinal hernia repair. Which of the following is
the best option for abdominal wall reconstruction in this case?
Suture plication of the transversalis fascia using PDS only
Suture plication of the hernial defect with nylon and placement of
prolene mesh anterior to external oblique
Suture plication of the hernia defect using nylon and re-enforcing with a
sutured repair of the abdominal wall
Sutured repair of the hernial defect with prolene and placement of
prolene mesh over the cord structures in the inguinal canal
Sutured repair of the hernial defect using nylon and placement of a
prolene mesh posterior to the cord structures

ANSWER IS E
Laparoscopic repair- bilateral and recurrent cases

During an inguinal hernia repair in males the cord structures will always
lie anterior to the mesh. In the conventional open repairs the cord
structures are mobilised and the mesh placed behind them, with a slit
made to allow passage of the cord structures through the deep inguinal
ring. Placement of the mesh over the cord structures results in chronic
pain and usually a higher risk of recurrence.

Laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair is the procedure of choice for
bilateral inguinal hernias.

Types of surgery include:
Onlay mesh repair (Lichtenstein style)
Inguinal herniorrhaphy
Shouldice repair
Darn repair
Laparoscopic mesh repair

Open mesh repair and laparoscopic repair are the two main procedures
in mainstream use. The Shouldice repair is a useful procedure in cases

146
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


where a mesh repair would be associated with increased risk of
infection, e.g. repair of case with strangulated bowel, as it avoids the use
of mesh. It is, however, far more technically challenging to perform.

A 43 year old man from Greece presents with colicky right upper
quadrant pain, jaundice and an urticarial rash. He is initially treated with
ciprofloxacin, but does not improve. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Infection with Wucheria bancrofti
Infection with Echinococcus granulosus
Type III hypersensitivity reaction
Allergy to ciprofloxacin
Common bile duct stones

ANSWER IS B
nfection with Echinococcus granulosus will typically produce a type I
hypersensitivity reaction which is characterised by an urticarial rash.
With biliary rupture a classical triad of biliary colic, jaundice and urticaria
occurs. Whilst jaundice and biliary colic may be a feature of CBD stones
they do not produce an urticarial rash. Antibiotic sensitivity with
ciprofloxacin may produce jaundice and a rash, however it was not
present at the outset and does not cause biliary colic

A 74 year old lady falls and injures her left arm. Following assessment
she is found to have an impacted fracture affecting the surgical neck of
the humerus. What is the most appropriate course of action?
Reduce the fracture and apply a plate to stabilize the fragments
Perform a hemiarthroplasty
Apply a collar and cuff system for three weeks and then commence
physiotherapy
Apply an upper limb cast for 8 weeks
Apply an external fixator system

ANSWER IS C
Impacted fractures of the surgical neck are stable injuries and usually
heal without complication. It is rare to need to resort to surgery. Its
important to start physiotherapy early.

An 80 year old lady is being investigated for dysphagia of long duration.
An OGD is attempted. The procedure is complicated and there is

147
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


significant difficulty in intubating the oesophagus. Eventually, the
procedure is abandoned and the patient returns to the ward. Here it is
noted that a significant amount of surgical emphysema is present. Which
of the diagnoses listed below is most likely to explain this presentation?
Globus
Barretts oesophagus
Squamous cell carcinoma
Pharyngeal pouch
Schatzki ring

ANSWER IS D
The early difficulty in intubation is most likely to be the result of
pharyngeal pouch. Schatzki rings can cause problems but can usually
be visualized. Whilst a squamous cell carcinoma can be perforated, it
would be unusual for this to occur spontaneously as perforation of
cancer typically occurs after attempted therapeutic intervention.

A 1 month old baby girl presents with bile stained vomiting. She had an
exomphalos and a congenital diaphragmatic hernia. What is the most
likely underlying explanation?
Duodenal atresia
Intestinal malrotation
Duplication cysts
Annular pancreas
Ileal atresia

ANSWER IS B
Exomphalos and diaphragmatic herniae are commonly associated with
malrotation.


Which of the structures listed below lies posterior to the carotid sheath at
the level of the 6th cervical vertebra?
Hypoglossal nerve
Vagus nerve
Cervical sympathetic chain
Ansa cervicalis
Glossopharyngeal nerve



148
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS C
The carotid sheath is crossed anteriorly by the hypoglossal nerves and
the ansa cervicalis. The vagus lies within it. The cervical sympathetic
chain lies posteriorly between the sheath and the prevertebral fascia.

A 20 year old man develops acute appendicitis, his appendix is removed
and he makes a full recovery. Which of the following pathological
processes is least likely to be present in the acutely inflamed tissues?
Altered Starlings forces
Sequestration of neutrophils
Formation of fluid exudate
Formation of granulomas
None of the above

ANSWER IS D
Neutrophil polymorphs=Acute inflammation.
Granuloma = Chronic inflammation.

Acute inflammation:
3 phases
1. Changes in blood vessel and flow: flush, flare, wheal
2. Fluid exudates (rich in protein i.e. Ig, coagulation factors) produced
via increased vascular permeability
3. Cellular exudates mainly containing neutrophil polymorphs pass into
extravascular space.
Neutrophils are then transported to tissues via:
a. Margination of neutrophils to the peripheral plasmatic of the vessel
rather than the central axial stream
b. Pavementing: Adhesion of neutrophils to endothelial cells in venules
at site of acute inflammation
c. Emigration: neutrophils pass between endothelial cells into the tissue

A 45 year old man presents with a lipoma located posterior to the
posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, approximately 4cm
superior to the middle third of the clavicle. During surgical excision of the
lesion troublesome bleeding is encountered. Which of the following is
the most likely source?
Internal jugular vein
External jugular vein
Common carotid artery


149
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Vertebral artery
Second part of the subclavian artery
ANSWER IS B
The external jugular vein runs obliquely in the superficial fascia of the
posterior triangle. It drains into the subclavian vein. During surgical
exploration of this area the external jugular vein may be injured and
troublesome bleeding may result. The internal jugular vein and carotid
arteries are located in the anterior triangle. The third, and not the
second, part of the subclavian artery is also a content of the posterior
triangle.

A 63 year old woman with severe angina undergoes a coronary artery
bypass procedure and her long saphenous vein is used as a bypass
conduit. Which of the types of transplant listed below best describes
this?
Allograft
Isograft
Xenograft
Autograft
None of the above

ANSWER IS D
The long saphenous vein is one of the commonest autografts in surgery

A 58 year old woman is admitted with an attack of severe acute
pancreatitis. She is managed on the intensive care unit and is making
progress. She then deteriorates and a CT scan shows extensive
pancreatic necrosis (>40%). There are concerns that this may have
become infected. What is the correct course of action?
Undertake a fine needle aspiration of the area
Perform a pancreatic necrosectomy
Perform a Whipples procedure
Arrange an ERCP
Perform a distal pancreatectomy
ANSWER IS A
When there are concerns that pancreatic necrosis may have become
infected the usual approach is to perform an image guided FNA for
culture. There is always the risk of seeding infection with such a strategy
so it must be performed with care. Pancreatic necrosectomy is not
usually undertaken until the presence of infection is proven.

150
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A




A 38 year old sheep farmer presents to the clinic with a 3 month history
of malaise and right upper quadrant pain. On examination, he is mildly
jaundiced. His liver function tests demonstrate a mild elevation in
bilirubin and transaminases, his full blood count shows an elevated
eosinophil level. An abdominal x-ray is performed by the senior house
officer and demonstrates a calcified lesion in the right upper quadrant of
the abdomen. What is the most probably underlying diagnosis?
Mesenchymal hamartoma
Clonorchiasis
Fasciolopsiasis
Liver cell adenoma
Hydatid cyst


ANSWER IS E
Hydatid disease is more common in those who work with sheep or dogs.
Liver function tests may be abnormal and an eosinophilia is often
present. Plain radiographs may reveal a calcified cyst wall.
Fasciolopsiasis infection is confined to intestinal wall in most cases.


A 25 year old man is found to have carcinoid syndrome. Which of the
following hormones is released by carcinoids?
Serotonin
Dopamine
Nor adrenaline
Adrenaline
Aldosterone


ANSWER IS A
Rule of thirds:

1/3 multiple
1/3 small bowel
1/3 metastasize
1/3 second tumour

Carcinoids secrete serotonin. Carcinoid syndrome will only occur in the

151
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


presence of liver metastasis as the hormone released from primary
lesions will typically be metabolised by the liver.


A 6 day old child is suspected of having a malrotation and requires
urgent abdominal exploration. What is the most appropriate surgical
approach?
Midline abdominal incision
Paramedian incision
Transverse supra umbilical abdominal incision
Transverse infra umbilical abdominal incision
Battle incision
ANSWER IS C
In young children, laparotomy is performed via transverse supra
umbilical incision. Access via midline incisions is very poor and they
should not be used.
A 67 year old man is due to undergo a revisional total hip replacement
using a posterior approach. After dividing gluteus maximus in the line of
its fibres there is brisk arterial bleeding. Which of the following vessels is
likely to be responsible?
Profunda femoris artery
External iliac artery
Internal iliac artery
Obturator artery
Inferior gluteal artery
 ANSWER IS E
The inferior gluteal artery runs on the deep surface of the gluteus
maximus muscle. It is a branch of the internal iliac artery. It is commonly
divided during the posterior approach to the hip joint.


A 63 year old man is admitted with rest pain and foot ulceration. An
angiogram shows a 3 cm area of occlusion of the distal superficial
femoral artery with 3 vessel run off. His ankle - brachial pressure index is
0.4. What is the most appropriate course of action?
Conservative management with medical therapy and exercise
Arterial bypass surgery using PTFE
Arterial bypass surgery using vein


152
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Primary amputation
Angioplasty
ANSWER IS E
Short segment disease and good run off with tissue loss is a compelling
indication for angioplasty. He should receive aspirin and a statin if not
already taking them.
When is it mandatory to involve an independent mental capacity
advocate ?
When a patient requires a significant intervention, time permits and the
patient lacks capacity to decide for themselves
When a patient cannot decide on the best treatment
When parents disagree about treatment of a child
When two doctors disagree about the best treatment option
When a patient has lost trust in their clinician
ANSWER IS A

The Mental Capacity Act (MCA) requires doctors to involve an
independent mental capacity advocate (IMCA) for serious medical
treatment decisions when:
a best interests decision is required because the doctor has assessed
the person as not having the capacity to make the decision themselves
the person does not have family or friends with whom it is appropriate to
consult about the decision.

Serious medical treatment is defined in the Mental Capacity Act 2005
(Independent Mental Capacity Advocates) (General) Regulations 2006
as treatment which involves providing, withdrawing or withholding
treatment in circumstances where one or more of the following apply:
in a case where a single treatment is being proposed, there is a fine
balance between its benefits to the patient and the burdens and risks it
is likely to entail for them
in a case where there is a choice of treatments, a decision as to which
one to use is finely balanced
what is proposed would be likely to involve serious consequences for the
patient.
The MCA Code of Practice says that serious consequences may include
treatment options which:
cause serious and prolonged pain, distress or side effects have
potentially major consequences for the patient (for example, major

153
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


surgery or stopping life-sustaining treatment)
have a serious impact on the patients future life choices.
An injured axillary artery is ligated between the thyrocervical trunk of the
subclavian and subscapular artery. Subsequent collateral circulation is
likely to result in reversal of blood flow in which of the vessels listed
below?
Circumflex scapular artery
Transverse cervical artery
Posterior intercostal arteries
Suprascapular artery
Profunda brachii artery


ANSWER IS A
The circumflex scapular artery is a branch of the subscapular artery and
normally supplies the muscle on the dorsal aspect of the scapula. In this
instance, flow is reversed in the circumflex scapular and subscapular
arteries forming a collateral circulation around the scapula.


A 65 year old diabetic female presents with a painless ulcer at the
medial malleolus, it has been present for the past 16 years. On
examination, she has evidence of truncal varicosities and a brownish
discolouration of the skin overlying the affected area. What is the most
likely cause?
Chronic obliterative arterial disease
Superficial venous insufficiency
Deep venous insufficiency
Mixed ulcer
Neuropathic ulcer
ANSWER IS B

Venous ulcers are usually associated with features of venous
insufficiency. These include haemosiderin deposition and varicose veins.
Neuropathic ulcers will tend to present at sites of pressure, which is not
typically at the medial malleolus.


Which of the statistical tests listed below is most appropriate to use with
data which follows a normal distribution?

154
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


T Test
Fishers exact test
Spearmans rank test
Mann Whitney U test
Bonferroni test
ANSWER IS A
A T Test is most suited to data which follows the normal distribution as
the others are non parametric tests. The Bonferroni test is used to
provide correction when multiple tests are used.
A 73 year old man presents with a tumour at the central aspect of the
posterior third of the tongue. To which of the following lymph node
groups is it most likely to metastasise?
Submental
Submandibular
Ipsilateral deep cervical nodes
Contralateral deep cervical nodes
Bilateral deep cervical nodes
ANSWER IS E
Posterior third tumours of the tongue commonly metastasise to the
bilateral deep cervical lymph nodes

Tumours of the posterior third of the tongue will typically metastasise
early and bilateral nodal involvement is well recognised, this is most
often true of centrally located tumours and those adjacent to the midline
as the lymph vessels may cross the median plane at this location.


A 45 year old lady presented with a 2cm mobile breast mass. A
mammogram is indeterminate (M3), USS shows benign changes (U2),
clinical examination is also indeterminate (P3). What is the next most
appropriate course of action?
Re-assure and discharge
Fine needle aspiration cytology
Excision biopsy
Image guided core biopsy
Wide local excision


ANSWER IS D

155
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


All discrete breast lumps, including those that seem benign, should have
a confirmed histological diagnosis. In this case, a core biopsy has not
yet been performed. This may yield a diagnosis that is concordant with
imaging findings. In which case, this concludes the investigative process
(if benign). If it remains unclear, excision biopsy will be needed.


A 22 year old man presents with a 6 day history of passage of bloody
diarrhoea with passage of mucous and slime. He is passing an average
of 8 to 9 bowel movements per day. On digital rectal examination there
is no discrete abnormality to feel, but there is some blood stained
mucous on the glove. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome
Ulcerative colitis
Irritable bowel syndrome
Rectal cancer
Diverticulitis
ANSWER IS B
he passage of bloody diarrhoea together with mucus and a short history
makes this a likely first presentation of inflammatory bowel disease. A
rectal malignancy in a 22 year old would be a very unlikely event. The
history is too short to be consistent with solitary rectal ulcer.


A 43 year old lady is diagnosed as having a malignant lesion in the
inferior aspect of her left breast. There is palpable axillary
lymphadenopathy. What is the most appropriate course of action?
Mastectomy and axillary node clearance
Wide local excision and axillary node clearance
Wide local excision and sentinel lymph node biopsy
Image guided fine needle aspiration of the axillary nodes
CT scanning of the chest, abdomen and pelvis


ANSWER IS D
 Where axillary nodal involvement is suspected from the outset it is
important to establish whether this is the case prior to surgery. This is
because, if axillary metastatic disease is present then the correct
management would be an axillary node clearance and this is irrespective
of the surgical plans for the breast primary. In the case of breast cancer,

156
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


image guided FNAC is acceptable as it is accurate and if carcinoma
cells are identified at FNA then axillary node clearance can be
performed. If FNAC is negative then a sentinel node biopsy should
accompany excision of the primary tumour.
Where the axilla is clinically clear on palpation and imaging then a
sentinel lymph node biopsy should accompany excision of the primary
tumour.


A 32 year old man who has suffered from Crohns disease for many
years presents with intermittent jaundice. When it occurs, it is obstructive
in nature. It then usually resolves spontaneously. What is the most likely
cause?
Crigler Najjar syndrome
Parasitic infection of the liver
Bile duct stones
Gilberts syndrome
Multi cystic liver disease
ANSWER IS C
Bile salts are absorbed in the terminal ileum. When this process is
impaired as in Crohns the patient may develop gallstones, if these pass
into the CBD then obstructive jaundice will result.


A 23 year old lady is persistently vomiting following a laparoscopic
appendicectomy for a perforated gangrenous appendicitis. Imaging
shows some dilated small bowel loops. What is the most appropriate
course of action?
Insertion of wide bore nasogastric tube
Insertion of narrow bore nasogastric tube
Administration of intravenous cyclizine
Administration of metoclopramide
Arrange a laparotomy


ANSWER IS A
This patient is likely to have a paralytic ileus and the administration of
anti emetic drugs in this situation achieves very little. It's important to
decompress the stomach and this can be achieved with a wide bore
nasogastric tube.

157
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A 19 year old lady has a long standing history of diarrhoea and weight
loss. She is investigated with an upper gastro intestinal endoscopy
which is normal. A small bowel contrast study shows a terminal ileal
stricture. A colonoscopy was performed which was normal but the
endoscopist was unable to intubate the terminal ileum. One week after
the colonoscopy she is admitted with small bowel obstruction. Steroids
are administered but despite this she fails to improve. What is the most
appropriate treatment?
Administration of steroids at increased dose
Right hemicolectomy
Small bowel resection
Sub total colectomy
Pan proctocolectomy


ANSWER IS B
Crohns disease commonly affects the terminal ileum and in this case the
ileocaecal valve, this means some form of colonic resection will be
needed in addition to the small bowel resection.

It is likely that this lady has terminal ileal disease. Although first
presentation of Crohns disease is usually managed with IV steroids,
these have been trialed here and failed. A resection will remove the
stricturing disease. If proximal small bowel disease has not been
excluded pre-operatively then this must be evaluated during surgery to
exclude other small bowel strictures.
A 34 year old man undergoes a sub total colectomy to treat fulminant
ulcerative colitis. What type of stoma is most likely to be fashioned?
End colostomy
Loop colostomy
End ileostomy
Loop ileostomy
End jejunostomy


ANSWER IS C
A sub total colectomy involves the removal of the entire right, transverse,
left and part of the sigmoid colon. The rectal stump is closed and an end
ileostomy fashioned in the right iliac fossa.


158
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A




An 83 year old man with a long standing staghorn calculus presents with
recurrent haematuria and investigation shows a mass of the left renal
pelvis. Of the lesions listed below, the diagnosis is:
Squamous cell carcinoma
Adenocarcinoma
Transitional cell carcinoma
Sarcoma
Transitional metaplasia
                               ANSWER IS A
SCC of the kidney usually arises in an area of chronic inflammation such
                   as a staghorn calculus. They are rare.


A 23 year old women has undergone a pan proctocolectomy and
ileoanal pouch because she suffers from familial adenomatous polyposis
coli. What is the commonest extra colonic lesion in this disorder?
Gastric fundal polyps
Trichilemmomas
Duodenal polyps
Fibrocystic disease of the breast
Skull osteomas

ANSWER IS C
 Duodenal polyps occur in up to 100% of patients with FAP if follow up is
continued for long enough. Duodenal cancer has an incidence of 4-10%.

Duodenal polyps are the commonest extra colonic lesion in FAP. Gastric
fundal polyps are seen in 50% of patients. Skull osteomas are seen in
Gardeners syndrome which is a variant of FAP.

Which of the following is not found within the deep perineal pouch in an
adult male?
Pudendal nerve
Dorsal nerve of the penis
Sphinter urethrae
Urethral artery
Obturator nerve
                                                ANSWER IS E


159
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


An unusually tall 43 year old lady presents to the surgical clinic with
bilateral inguinal hernias. She develops chest pain and collapses. As
part of her investigations a chest x-ray shows evidence of mediastinal
widening. What is the most likely underlying diagnosis?
Pulmonary embolus
Aortic dissection
Tietze syndrome
Boerhaave syndrome
Myocardial infarct

ANSWER IS B
Marfans syndrome may present with a variety of connective tissue
disorders such as bilateral inguinal hernia. They are at high risk of aortic
dissection, as in this case.

Which of the following would be a sensible volume for maintenance
intravenous fluids in a 3 day old term neonate?
50ml/ kg/ hour
50ml/ kg/ day
100ml/kg/hour
100ml/kg/day
200ml/kg/day

ANSWER IS D
Calculate routine maintenance IV fluid rates for children and young
people using the HollidaySegar formula (100 ml/kg/day for the first 10 kg
of weight, 50 ml/kg/day for the next 10 kg and 20 ml/kg/day for the
weight over 20 kg). Be aware that over a 24hour period, males rarely
need more than 2500 ml and females rarely need more than 2000 ml of
fluids.

From birth to day 1: 50-60 ml/kg/day.
Day 2: 70-80 ml/kg/day.
Day 3: 80-100 ml/kg/day.
Day 4: 100-120 ml/kg/day.
Days 5-8: 120-150 ml/kg/day.




160
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 26 year old man who smokes heavily develops aching, crampy pains
in his legs. On examination, distal limb pulses are diminished. What is
the most likely cause?
Vasculitis
Steal syndrome
Clot embolus
Vasospasm
Arterial injury

 ANSWER IS A
This is likely to represent Buergers disease. It is commonest in young
males who smoke heavily.
A 55 year old man is involved in a stabbing and receives an injury to the
left iliac fossa. After transfer to hospital he is taken immediately to
theatre because of haemodynamic instability. At laparotomy, an injury to
the colonic mesentery is found to be the cause of blood loss, there is an
associated injury to the left colon with local perforation and
contamination. What is the most appropriate course of action?
Undertake a repair of the descending colon and place drains
Resect the left colon and perform an end to end anastomosis
Resect the left colon and construct a left iliac fossa end colostomy
Place an omental patch over the defect in the colon and drains adjacent
to this
Perform a sub total colectomy and end ileostomy


ANSWER IS C
Colonic injuries in the face of significant instability and contamination are
probably safest resected, particularly since the scenario alludes to the
presence of colonic mesenteric vascular injury which might compromise
attempt to heal a repair.


A 19 year old man has a skin lesion excised from his back. He is
reviewed clinically at 4 months post procedure and the surgeon notes
that the scar has begun to contract. Which of the following facilitates this
process?
Myofibroblasts
Neutrophils
Granuloma formation

161
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Macrophages
Fibroblasts


ANSWER IS A
As wounds mature the fibroblast population differentiates into
myofibroblasts (usually 6 weeks and beyond), these have a contractile
phenotype and therefore help in contracting the wound. Immature
fibroblasts, though able to adhere to the ECM, do not have this ability.


Which of the following blood gas results would fit with metabolic acidosis
with a compensatory respiratory alkalosis?
pH 7.36, PaCO2 7.3, PO2 8.9 (FiO2 40%), Bicarbonate 30.2, Base
excess +5.3
pH 7.14, PaCO2 7.4, PaO2 8.9 (FiO2 40%), Bicarbonate 14 mmol, Base
excess -10.6
pH 7.57, PaCO2 3.5, Pa O2 24.5 (FiO2 85%), Bicarbonate 23.5, Base
excess +1.8 mmol
pH 7.32, PCO2 3.8, PaO2 22.2 (FiO2 40%), Bicarbonate 19.1, Base
excess -7.9
pH 7.19, pCO2 10.2, pO2 16 (FiO2 85%), Bicarbonate 23.8, Base
excess -2.2 mmol


                                                 ANSWER IS D

A 75 year old man is admitted with large bowel obstruction and on
investigation is found to have a significant sigmoid diverticular stricture
as the underlying cause. What is the most appropriate treatment?
Colonoscopy and pneumatic dilatation of the stricture
Laparotomy and Hartmanns procedure
Colonoscopy and insertion of self expanding metallic stent
Loop ileostomy
Laparotomy, sigmoid colectomy and colorectal anastomosis


ANSWER IS B
Diverticular strictures have a high complication rate with stent insertion.
Where patients present with large bowel obstruction, the best option is to
resect the affected area. Given the fact that there is underlying colonic

162
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


obstruction, a primary anastomosis would be unwise. Diverticular
strictures should not be dilated.
A 60 year old male is admitted to the emergency room with a fall. He
lives with his wife and still works as a restaurant manager. He has a past
history of benign prostatic hypertrophy and is currently taking
tamsulosin. He is otherwise fit and healthy. On examination, there is
right hip tenderness on movement in all directions. A hip x-ray confirms
an intertrochanteric fracture. What is the best management option?
Cemented hemiarthroplasty
Total hip replacement
Dynamic hip screw
Percutaneous pinning
Leg traction


ANSWER IS C
The blood supply to the femoral head may be intact and the fracture
should heal with compression type devices such as gamma nails or
dynamic hip screws. The latter device being the most commonly
performed therapeutic intervention.


A 71 year old man presents with a painful lower calf ulcer, mild pitting
oedema and an ABPI of 0.3. What is the most likely cause?
Mixed ulcer
Deep venous insufficiency
Chronic obliterative arterial disease
Squamous cell carcinoma
Neuropathic ulcer

ANSWER IS C
 Painful ulcers associated with a low ABPI are usually arterial in nature.
The question does not indicate that features of chronic venous
insufficiency are present. Patients may have mild pitting oedema as
many vascular patients will also have ischaemic heart disease and
elevated right heart pressures. The absence of more compelling signs of
venous insufficiency makes a mixed ulcer less likely.

Which of the nerves listed below provides sensory innervation to the skin
overlying the lateral aspect of the nose?
163
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Infratrochlear nerve
Zygomatic nerve
Nasopalatine nerve
Lateral nasal branches of the ethmoidal nerve
Frontal nerve

ANSWER IS D
The lateral aspect of the external nose is innervated by lateral nasal
branches of the anterior ethmoidal nerve. The ethmoidal nerve is a
branch of the nasociliary nerve which is one of the divisions of the
trigeminal.

A 63 year old man undergoes an upper GI endoscopy and adrenaline
injection for a large actively bleeding duodenal ulcer. He remains stable
for 6 hours and the nurses then call because he has passed 400ml
malaena and has become tachycardic (pulse rate 120) and hypotensive
(Bp 80/40). What is the best option?
Reassure that blood trapped in the upper portion of the gastrointestinal
system will pass and that this episode will resolve with phosphate
enema
Perform a repeat upper GI endoscopy
Perform a laparotomy and under-running of the ulcer
Administer tranexamic acid and intravenous proton pump inhibitors
Insert a Minnesota tube

ANSWER IS C
The decision as to how best to manage patients with re-bleeding is
difficult. Whilst it is tempting to offer repeat endoscopy, this intervention
is best used on those with small ulcers. Large posteriorly sited duodenal
ulcers are at high risk for re-bleeding and the timeframe of this event
suggests that primary endoscopic haemostasis was inadequate. Surgery
thus represents the safest way forward.


Which of the following statements relating to the right phrenic nerve is
false?
It lies deep to the prevertebral layer of deep cervical fascia
Crosses posterior to the 2nd part of the subclavian artery
It runs on the anterior surface of the scalene muscle
On the right side it leaves the mediastinum via the vena cava hiatus at a
164
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


level of T8
The right phrenic nerve passes over the right atrium


                                           ANSWER IS B


A 67-year old lady with known breast cancer is seen in your clinic with
regard to breast reconstruction options. Which of the following regarding
free tissue transfer is correct? Select ONE answer only.
A. There are fewer complications than with local pedicled options
B. Only the abdomen can be used as a donor site
C. It is better to perform a free flap after any radiotherapy treatment has
been completed
D. Flap necrosis can occur in the outer zones of donor skin as perfusion
here is not as reliable as in the centre
E. A free flap is contra-indicated because of the patient’s age.


ANSWER IS D
Free tissue transfer is a longer procedure and as such, more
complications can arise. Donor sites include abdomen, thigh and
buttock. A large trial suggests age is not a barrier for free tissue transfer.
Radiotherapy affects vessel wall composure and as such immediate free
transfers are easier to perform than delayed. Flap necrosis commonly
occurs on the outer zones, for this reason the outer section is often
discarded. Even with a reliable blood supply the rate of DIEP flap loss is
upto 10% (as shown by the recent national mastectomy and breast
reconstruction audit).


A 55-year-old female is referred to a general surgery clinic after a
dermatologist has diagnosed a migratory necrolytic erythema. The
patient also has a history of diabetes mellitus and weight loss. What is
the most likely diagnosis? Select one answer only.
A. Cushings’ syndrome
B. Gastrinoma
C. Glucagonoma
D. Insulinoma
E. Phaeochromocytoma.

165
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS C
Glucagonomas are very rare tumours with an incidence of around 1 in
20 million. There are often metastases present when the patient
presents. Classic features of glucagonomas are migratory necrolytic
erythema, diabetes mellitus and weight loss. The rash is very
characteristic and may be sufficient evidence to raise the concern itself.
It is secondary to a zinc deficiency in the skin.
A 19-year old female student presents to clinic having undergone
genetic testing for breast cancer given her strong family history. She is
noted to be positive for the BRCA1 gene. How should you advise her?
Select ONE answer only.
A. BRCA1 gene is responsible for apoptosis of normal breast cells
B. Highest carrier rates of BRCA1 mutations occur in the black
population
C. She has a 50% chance of developing breast cancer by age 50
D. She has a 100% chance of developing breast cancer by age 50
E. She is protected against developing ovarian cancer.
A 34-year old woman undergoes ultrasound examination of a breast
cyst. Which of the following feature on ultrasound is consistent with this
diagnosis? Select ONE answer only.
A. Irregular wall
B. Smooth anterior border
C. Black hypoechoic centres without internal echoes
D. Blood vessels running through them
E. Pulsatile.
ANSWER IS C
Cysts have typical features of hypoechoic centres, smooth walls and
sharp edges. Ultrasound has a sensitivity of 75% and specificity of 97%
in the diagnosis of breast cancer and is used as an adjunct to
mammography in patients over 35. In patients under 35 it is often the
primary radiological modality as the breasts are too dense for accurate
mammographic interpretation.


You are attending a lecture on breast cancer and are asked which type
is most common. Which of the following is the correct answer? Select
ONE answer only.
A. Ductal

166
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


B. Lobular
C. Mucinous
D. Papillary
E. Medullary.
ANSWER IS A
Ductal carcinoma accounts for approximately 75% of all cases and is
composed of invasive ductal cancer (55%) and ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS). It arises from the breast ducts. In situ disease carries an
increased lifetime risk of developing invasive carcinoma. Invasive lobular
carcinoma (ILC) is the next commonest type of breast cacner (10%) with
the other types being relatively rare. Although having a slightly better
prognosis, ILC is more often multifocal, bilateral and mammographically
occult.
You are assisting in a mastectomy and a level two axillary clearance.
Which of the following statements best describes the anatomical level to
which clearance should be gained? Select ONE answer only.
A. Up to the medial border of pectoralis minor
B. Above pectoralis minor
C. Below pectoralis minor
D. To the outer border of the first rib
E. Up to the medial border of pectoralis major.
ANSWER IS A
Axillary clearance is divided into 3 levels:
Level I: Lateral to pectoralis minor
Level II: Upto medial border of pectoralis minor
Level III: Beyond medial border of pectoralis minor.


A 64-year-old female presents with a painless lump she has noticed on
the front of her neck which moves on swallowing. On examination, she is
noted to have a thyroid nodule and cervical lymphadenopathy. An FNA
of the thyroid nodule reveals psammoma bodies. What is the most likely
diagnosis? Select one answer only.
A. Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma
B. Follicular thyroid carcinoma
C. Lymphoma
D. Medullary thyroid carcinoma
E. Papillary thyroid carcinoma

167
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS E
Papillary carcinoma of the thyroid gland accounts for around two-thirds
of thyroid malignancies. The tumour spreads via lymphatics and at
presentation over half of patients will have cervical lymph node
involvement. Histologically Psammoma bodies are typical. Follicular
thyroid carcinoma accounts for 20% of thyroid tumours and classically
spreads via the bloodstream. Therefore lymph node involvement at
presentation is very uncommon. Medullary thyroid carcinoma occurs in
5-10% of thyroid malignancies. It is derived from C cells and therefore
produces calcitonin which can be measured in the blood. Anaplastic
carcinoma is a very aggressive tumour type that is most commonly
found in the elderly. It has a very poor prognosis with few patients
surviving beyond 1 yea


A 35-year-old female is referred by her GP with hyperhidrosis. On further
questioning it emerges this is intermittent in nature and is precipitated by
exercise and overeating. In addition to this she reports severe
headaches and palpitations at the same time. On one occasion her
blood pressure was measured and was found to be 190/110. What is the
most likely diagnosis? Select one answer only.
A. Cushing syndrome
B. Gastrinoma
C. Neuroblastoma
D. Phaeochromocytoma
E. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.


ANSWER IS D
Phaeochromocytomas are rare catecholamine-producing tumours which
arise from sympathetic paraganglia cells which are collections of
adrenaline- secreting chromaffin cells. They occur in around one in a
million people and are the underlying cause for less than 1% of
hypertension. Around 10% are bilateral, 10% are malignant, and 10%
are extra-adrenal. The most common extra-adrenal site is the organ of
Zuckerkandl which is by the aortic bifurcation. The most common
symptom is sweating, and other symptoms include paroxysmal
headaches, palpitations praecordial pain. Pre-operative management
with α and ß blockers is crucial prior to anaesthetic induction to minimise
morbidity and mortality.

168
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A



A 41-year-old woman who is six weeks postpartum presents with a
tender periareolar lump with nipple retraction. What is the likely
diagnosis? Single best answer - select one answer only.
A. Abscess
B. Cyst
C. Fibroadenoma
D. Intraductal papilloma
E. Malignancy.
ANSWER IS A
The most likely diagnosis of a tender lump in this breastfeeding patient is
a postpartum abscess. The nipple retraction is caused by inflammatory
fibrosis.


37-year-old with a history of benign breast disease enquires about her
risk of developing malignant breast disease. Which of the following is
associated with the highest risk of developing malignant breast disease?
Select ONE answer only.
A. Sclerosing adenosis
B. Duct ectasia
C. Fibroadenoma
D. Apocrine metaplasia
E. Lobular carcinoma in situ


ANSWER IS E
LCIS carries a 10 times increased risk of developing malignant breast
cancer. Close clinical clinical follow up and mammography are indicated.
If asked directly whether the other conditions area associated with an
increased risk of breast cancer the answer is probably that any benign
breast disease is associated with an increased risk but that it is very,
very small


A 35-year old woman with known node positive breast cancer and a
positive family of the disease has undergone a mastectomy, axillary
clearance and chemotherapy. She returns for the pathology result and
asks you about her 5-year prognosis. Which is one the following is
correct? Select ONE answer only.

169
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A. The Nottingham Prognostic Index is purely a mathematical equation
and should not be applied to the individual patient
B. Her risk of recurrence should be expected given her strong family
history
C. The Nottingham Prognostic Index is calculated from size of the lesion,
the number of lymph nodes involved and tumour grade
D. It is impossible to predict prognosis from pathological results alone
E. Immune modulators would prolong survival in this patient.


ANSWER IS C
The Nottingham prognostic index was constructed in 1982 based on a
retrospective analysis of 9 factors in 387 patients. It divides patient
prognosis into good (83% 10 year survival) moderate (52% 10 year
survival) and poor (13% 10 year survival). There is an updated
classification which an additional 2 further groups but this has not been
widely adopted. It is used to compare survival outcomes between breast
units.


A 45-year old woman, who has a 3-month daughter and is breast
feeding, attends outpatients with a finding of a new breast lump. How
should she be managed? Select ONE answer only.
A. Lumps are common in breast feeding woman and she should be re-
assured and reviewed in 6 months
B. Radiological imaging and clinical examination in the first instance
C. Mammogram in combination with tissue biopsy
D. Mammogram in combination with tissue cytology and clinical
examination
E. Radiological imaging in combination with tissue biopsy, clinical
examination and lymph node staging.


ANSWER IS B
In this lady the most likely diagnosis is benign breast disease associated
with the heightened hormonal state secondary to breast feeding (a
galactocoele). She should have a clinical assessment and imaging
which as she is over 35 should be with mammography and ultrasound.
The need for a tissue diagnosis (FNA/Core biopsy) would depend on
these results. If possible a biopsy should be avoided as it is associated

170
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


with an unacceptable risk of a mammary fistula which is very difficult to
treat. It is often sufficient to repeat imaging at an interval if the initial
imaging is not suspicious.


A 54-year-old female presents with a painless fixed lump in the upper
outer quadrant of the right breast which has been present for the last
four weeks. Mammogram has not revealed any abnormality but
ultrasound has shown a 21mm irregular mass. What is the likely
diagnosis? Single best answer - select one answer only.
A. Benign Phyllodes
B. Fibroadenoma
C. Intraductal Carcinoma
D. Lobular Carcinoma
E. Radial Scar.


ANSWER IS D
Lobular carcinoma is the second most common type of breast cancer
but can be mammographically occult. Both a fixed lump on clinical
examination and an irregular mass on imaging suggests malignancy
rather than a benign lesion. A radial scar is most typically diagnosed on
mammographic screening and usually impalpable.
A 42-year-old male is referred to his GP because of problems in his
workplace linked to his mood swings. On taking a detailed history he
reports episodes of light-headedness, disorientation with an associated
aggressive temper. These resolve following the consumption of food. He
has previously been investigated and was found to have a blood sugar
of 1.8 mm/l during an attack. What is the most likely diagnosis? Select
one answer only.
A. Gastrinoma
B. Glucagonoma
C. Insulinoma
D. Phaeochromocytoma
E. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.


ANSWER IS C
Insulinomas are not common and occur in around 1 in a million of the
population. They arise from ß islet cells and are mostly benign. They
171
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


often cause symptoms relating to hypoglycaemia e.g. lightheadedness,
mood swings and in some cases unconsciousness. The diagnosis
should be suspected when Whipple’s triad is present - attacks brought
on by fasting, hypoglycaemia (<2.0mmol/l) during an episode and
symptoms then improving with glucose administration.


A 52-year-old female undergoes a thyroidectomy for a follicular
carcinoma of the thyroid gland. Later you are called urgently to the ward
as the patient has become acutely short of breath and dropped her
oxygen saturations. On examination a tense swelling is seen beneath
the dressings. What is the most likely diagnosis? Select one answer
only.
A. Anaphylaxis
B. Infection
C. Tension haematoma
D. Thyroid storm
E. Tracheal injury.


ANSWER IS C
A tension haematoma can occur following a thyroidectomy and
represents a surgical emergency as the airway could be compromised
as evidenced by the shortness of breath and drop in oxygen saturations
in this case. Immediate measures to control this include removing any
clips or using a scalpel to release blood and thereby relieve the
pressure. There is no precipitant in the history to induce anaphylaxis.
The history is too acute to make an infection likely. Thyroid storm is very
unlikely to manifest as a compromised airway and more likely
restlessness, confusion, tachycardia and pyrexia. If tracheal injury had
occurred intra-operatively, it is likely to present prior to the patient
returning to the ward.


A 46-year old pre-menopausal woman presents with a rapidly growing
lump in her left breast. There is no associated nipple discharge or
ulceration. What is the likely diagnosis? Select ONE answer only.
A. Phyllodes tumour
B. Ductal carcinoma
C. Fibroadenoma

172
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


D. Breast cyst
E. Pagets disease.


ANSWER IS A
Phyllodes tumour occur in premenopausal women and manifest as
rapidly growing tumours, often enlarging over a few weeks. They rarely
involve the nipple areolar complex or ulcerate. Overlying skin may have
a shiny appearance and reveal presence of superficial veins. Early
tumours can be confused with fibroadenoma’s which typically present 15
years earlier. Approximately 60-70% are benign with the chance of
malignancy increasing with age.


You are assisting in a free flap reconstruction of the breast. Which of the
following recipient vessels is commonly used in the micro-anastomosis?
Select ONE answer only.
A. Subclavian artery
B. Internal mammary artery
C. Axillary artery
D. Thoracodorsal artery
E. Serratus branch of thoracodorsal artery.


ANSWER IS B
The internal mammary vessels are found underneath the medial 2-4th
ribs, which are resected during the procedure. It is possible to use other
recipient vessels, such as those based on the thoracodorsal axis,
however the dissection is harder


A 69-year old woman has undergone mastectomy and axillary surgery
for breast cancer. She returns to clinic. During the consultation she asks
you what stage her cancer is at. She has read a little on the internet but
does not wholly understand the implication of stage on her overall
survival. Which of the following can you advise? Select ONE answer
only.
A. Staging cannot be assessed without full radiological imaging including
a CT chest/abdomen/pelvis and PET scan
B. Staging is a medical term used for cancer research purposes, it has

173
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


no implication on clinical disease free survival period
C. Breast cancer has 4 stages, where stage 4 has a better prognosis
than stage 1
D. Staging is based on histopathological analysis of the cancer and
follows the TNM classification, where T is tumour size, N is nodal
involvement and M is metastasis
E. An axillary dissection should be performed in order to establish
whether she has lymph node metastasis in order to fully stage her
disease.


ANSWER IS D
Stage of disease is determined by histological analysis of the tumour
specimen and lymph. Follow up scans such as CT are reserved for
follow up where distant metastatic spread is suspected. If this hasn’t
been assessed it is designated Mx Staging of a disease allows
identification of those patients who would benefit from entry into trials as
well as informing the patient on their likely disease free survival period.


A 28-year-old female presents with a two week history of discomfort and
a lump in the 6 o’clock region adjacent to the nipple-areolar complex.
She is a BRCA 2 carrier, has mild asthma and smokes twelve cigarettes
a day. What is the likely diagnosis? Single best answer - select one
answer only.
A. Fat necrosis
B. Fibroadenoma
C. Harmatoma
D. Intraductal papilloma
E. Periductal mastitis


ANSWER IS E
The most like cause of a painful lump in a young smoker is periductal
mastitis. Smoking is the likely aetiology here. Her BRCA 2 history is a
red-herring. She may develop an abscess, and mammary duct fistula to
the skin can occur. Antibiotics can help settle the inflammation but
smoking cessation is most important to allow resolution and prevent
further complications.


174
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 23-year old women who has given birth to one child present with a
growing mobile lump in her right breast. It is painless with no associated
nipple discharge. What is the likely diagnosis? Select ONE answer only.
A. Breast cyst
B. Ductal carcinoma
C. Pagets disease
D. Fibroadenoma
E. Phyllodes tumour


 ANSWER IS D
Fibroadenoma’s are composed of fibrous and glandular tissue. They are
highly mobile with well-defined edges. They are often termed ‘breast
mouse’ due to their mobility. All breast lumps should undergo triple
assessment. In this age group fibroadenoma is by far the most likely
diagnosis with breast cysts a close second.


A 50-year old female consults you regarding breast screening as she is
unsure whether she should take this up. Which of the following is true?
A. Breast screening will be able to tell her if she does or does not have
breast cancer
B. A true positive is a positive test result in the presence of the disease
C. A true negative is a positive test result in the absence of disease
D. A false positive is a positive result in the presence of the disease
E. A false negative is a negative result in the absence of the disease.


ANSWER IS B
Breast screening has recently been extended to include patients
between the ages of 47 and 73 years. It involves 3 yearly mammograms
which are taken in two views and are also double read. The main aim of
screening is to detect early stage breast cancers which are still localized
to the breast and therefore amenable to treatment


You are assisting in a sentinel node biopsy for a patient with known
breast cancer. Which of the following statements is correct? Select ONE
answer only.
A. At least 10 nodes must be sampled to give an accurate nodal stage

175
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


B. Sentinel node biopsy involves identifying the first 4 nodes of a basin
through which the majority of lymph from the breast drains
C. Lymphoscintigraphy can be performed up to one week in advance of
the procedure
D. Blue dye is contraindicated in pregnancy
E. There is a high incidence of brachial plexus traction following sentinel
node.


ANSWER IS D
Sentinel node biopsy reduces the number of patients who require a
lymph node dissection, thereby reducing complications such as
lymphoedema. However, there is still a false negative result and as such
patients should be counseled accordingly. It involves identifying the first
nodes which drain the primary tumour and is usually 1-2 nodes but can
be more. A combination of radioactive colloid and blue dye (patent blue)
can be used but the blue dye is contraindicated in pregnancy.


A 33-year old female is seen in your clinic. She has already undergone
mastectomy for breast cancer and wishes to have a pedicled
myocutaneous flap reconstruction. Which of the following is correct?
Select ONE answer only.
A. It is associated with a higher rate of failure as compared to free flap
reconstruction
B. The latissimus dorsi flap is based on the thoracodorsal vessels
C. The latissimus dorsi flap is based on the circumflex scapular artery
D. She should expect a small vertical scar on her back
E. A ‘B’ cup breast is the largest that can be feasibly produced by this
type of reconstruction.


ANSWER IS B
The thoracodorsal vessels supply the latissimus dorsi which is a
pedicled myocutaneous flap. It can be combined with an implant to
recreate large breast volumes. An extended lat dorsi, which includes the
surface fat, can be taken to increase the volume to approximately a C
cup without using an implant. A skin paddle is taken with the muscle,
and as such a long scar is not unusual. Its length and orientation varies
according to patient and surgeon preferences.

176
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A 48-year-old obese female presents with right upper quadrant (RUQ)
pain and nausea, she reports similar episodes in the past which have
resolved spontaneously. On examination she is afebrile and has a soft
abdomen which is tender in the RUQ and a plain X-ray shows radio-
opaque round opacities in the RUQ. These are thought to represent
gallstones. What proportion of gallstones can be seen on a plain
abdominal X-ray? Select one answer only.
A. <1%
B. 10%
C. 30%
D. 50%
E. >75%.


ANSWER IS B
Around 10-15% of gallstones can be seen on plain imaging. These often
appear as rings due to calcium deposition around a central organic core.
In some cases the gallbladder may be calcified (‘porcelain gallbladder’).


A 41-year-old male is referred from his GP with a long history of
epigastric pain which is relieved by eating. He is otherwise well, and
drinks alcohol only occasionally. The only other feature of note is a long
standing history of diarrhoea which hasn’t responded to several changes
in diet. An OGD reveals multiple small duodenal ulcers. What is the most
likely diagnosis? Select one answer only.
A. Curling’s ulcer
B. Cushing’s ulcer
C. Duodenal carcinoma
D. VIPoma
E. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome


 ANSWER IS E
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (gastrinoma) is the 2nd most common islet-
cell tumour and around a third have MEN-1 syndrome. The tumour
produces very large quantities of a gastrin-like substance into the
bloodstream resulting in increased gastric acid secretion. Patients
complain of epigastric pain due to peptic ulceration, some will have


177
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


oesophagitis and diarrhoea is common (thought to be due to the high
acid output).


A 54-year-old woman undergoes laparoscopic biliary surgery. The
operation is difficult. Following the operation, she becomes unwell. On
the third day, there is bile in the drain and mild jaundice. Select the
single most likely diagnosis from the options listed below.
A. Common bile duct damage
B. Biliary spasm
C. Acute pancreatitis
D. Transfusion reaction
E. Drug-induced biliary stasis.


 ANSWER IS A
Following laparoscopic cholecystectomy, any biliary leak and jaundice
should make one suspicious of bile duct injury. This is best investigated
with ERCP
A 63-year-old man presents with a 5-day history of severe upper
abdominal pain and vomiting. On examination there is a profound
tachypnoea and tachycardia; he has generalised upper abdominal
tenderness. He has an Amylase level of 500. Please select the most
appropriate diagnosis from the list below.
A. Acute cholecystitis
B. Obstructive jaundice
C. Gallstone ileus
D. Mirizzi’s syndrome
E. Acute pancreatitis.
ANSWER IS E
The differential diagnosis is gallbladder perforation but this is much less
common than pancreatitis. Typically patients present with severe upper
abdominal pain radiating to the back, often associated with nausea and
vomiting. Signs of cardiovascular or respiratory dysfunction may be
present, abdominal signs range from mild epigastric or left upper
quadrant tenderness to generalized peritonitis. When considering this
subject, the candidate is advised to think of complications within and
without the gallbladder, starting with the former and progressing to the
ileum.

178
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


A 43-year-old man, who is an alcoholic, presents to the emergency
department with pain radiating to the back. The pain is relieved by
leaning forward. Select the most likely diagnosis from the list of options
below.
A. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas
B. Chronic pancreatitis
C. Biliary obstruction
D. Acute pancreatitis
E. Pancreatic pseudocyst


ANSWER IS B
This 43-year-old alcoholic with pain radiating in his back which is
relieved by leaning forward is most likely to be suffering from chronic
pancreatitis. A very similar picture can be seen with carcinoma of the
head of the pancreas but the one discriminating feature is that, in
carcinoma, the pain is constant.


A 45-year-old woman with known gallstones is admitted with epigastric
pain and vomiting. Her serum amylase is 1194u 1ml. An abdominal
ultrasound shows gallstones in the CBD with a dilated CBD and it is
thought she has acute gallstone pancreatitis. Her other test results are
as follows:
CXR and AXR unremarkable, WCC 9x109/l
Calcium 2.3 mmo1/l
Urea 9mmol/l LDH 352 iu/l
Albumin 35g/l • blood glucose 7mmol/l and
an ABG shows a PaO2 of 12kPa. With this information, which scoring
system can be best used to assess the severity of her pancreatitis?
Select one answer only.
A. APACHE
B. Balthazar
C. Glasgow
D. Hinchey
E. Ranson


ANSWER IS C
Several different scoring systems exist to grade the severity of

179
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


pancreatitis. The APACHE score requires additional information to those
provided e.g.blood pressure, urine output. The Balthazar grade is based
on the CT appearance of the pancreas, Ranson’s criteria are valid for
alcohol-induced pancreatitis and can only be applied after 48 hours. The
Hinchey classification grades diverticulitis not pancreatitis


A 35-year-old woman presents with worsening pain in her right upper
quadrant associated with nausea and vomiting. She is neither clinically
nor biochemically jaundiced but is febrile. An ultrasound reveals
gallstones, thickening of the gallbladder wall and a common bile duct
diameter of 3 mm. Choose the single most appropriate definitive
management option for this case.
A. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy + common bile duct exploration
B. Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangio-Pancreatogram (ERCP) and
sphincterotomy
C. Open cholecystectomy + common bile duct exploration
D. Percutaneous (radiological) gallbladder drainage
E. Early laparoscopic cholecystectomy +/- pre-operative
cholangiography


ANSWER IS E
This lady has acute cholecystitis with no evidence of common bile duct
stones. The main choice lies between early (on the index admission) or
interval cholecystectomy +/- pre-operative cholangiography. Opinion is
divided but, increasingly, surgery is being advocated on the index
admission. This is in the acceptance that although the rate of conversion
to open surgery is high (20% approximately), it is similarly high at a later
date and further complications, including further episodes of
inflammation, occur with regularity while on the waiting list.


A 65-year-old female presents with right upper quadrant pain and
intermittent nausea and vomiting. She reports that recently she has lost
weight and recalls an ultrasound scan several years ago which showed
gallstones but as she was asymptomatic at the time did not undergo
surgery. A cholecystectomy is subsequently performed and the histology
for this shows a tumour of the gallbladder. What is the most likely type of
tumour of the gallbladder? Select one answer only.

180
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


A. Adenocarcinoma
B. Haemangioma
C. Sarcoma
D. Squamous cell carcinoma
E. Transitional cell carcinoma.


ANSWER IS A
Around 85% of tumours of the gallbladder are associated with
gallstones. The initial features can be very similar to chronic cholecystitis
with right upper quadrant pain, nausea and vomiting. Patients can also
develop weight loss, obstructive jaundice and a right upper quadrant
mass may be palpable. Adenocarcinomas are the most common tumour
type accounting for 90% of tumours, followed by squamous cell
carcinomas which form around 10%.


A 75-year-old man who has had a prolonged intensive care unit
admission following an emergency abdominal aortic aneurysm repair is
referred to the surgical team because of increased abdominal pain and
discomfort noted when he is moved. His bloods and urine show normal
amylase and lipase levels respectively. A CT showed no leak from the
anastomosis, but an ultrasound scan shows a dilated gallbladder with
oedema in the wall. However, no gallstones were noted. What is the
most likely diagnosis? Select one answer only.
A. Aorta-enteric fistulae
B. Biliary colic
C. Choleystitis
D. Ileus
E. Pancreatitis.


 ANSWER IS C
Acalculous Choleystitis is rare, but can occur in critically ill patients often
on intensive care unit. The mechanism for this is thought to involve
gallbladder stasis due to analgesia or parenteral nutrition. Imaging
includes ultrasound which can show dilated gallbladder with oedema in
the wall.



181
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


An 18-year-old gap year student presents to A&E with right sided
abdominal pain and rigors. On examining him he is clammy to touch,
has a temperature of 38.5 and is tender in the right upper quadrant. His
only medical history of note is dysentery whilst on a backpacking trip to
Mexico 2 months ago.What is the most likely diagnosis? Select one
answer only.
A. Amoebic liver abscess
B. Cholangiorcarcinoma
C. Gallstones
D. Hydatid disease
E. Pancreatitis.


ANSWER IS A
Amoebic liver abscesses often occur secondary to entamoeba histolytica
infection in the gut entering the portal circulation and spreading to the
liver. The condition occurs mostly in endemic areas and affects travellers
visiting them. Clinical features include abdominal pain (most commonly
in the right upper quadrant), fever, rigors and nausea/vomiting. Some
patients will report a history of dysentery recently. Imaging with
ultrasound scan or CT is useful in the diagnosis, and can be combined
with aspiration which produces a thick fluid resembling anchovy sauce.
Treatment mostly consists of metronidazole sometimes with
percutaneous drainage.


A 45-year-old man undergoes an endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) for removal of a common bile duct
stone. The procedure is particularly difficult but is eventually successful.
Following the operation, he deteriorates badly, developing a pyrexia and
severe abdominal pain, with increased amylase of 500. Select the single
most likely diagnosis from the options listed below.
A. Common bile duct damage
B. Biliary spasm
C. Acute pancreatitis
D. Transfusion reaction
E. Drug-induced biliary stasis.

ANSWER IS C
ERCP is associated with acute pancreatitis in 1% of cases.
182
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


A 30-year-old female who had an open cholecystectomy presents with
obstructive jaundice 48 h after surgery. Select the most likely diagnosis
from the list of options below for this case.
A. Cholangiocarcinoma
B. Gall bladder calculi
C. Common bile duct calculus
D. Mucocele of the gall bladder
E. Empyema of the gall bladder.

ANSWER IS C
Obstructive jaundice 48 h after open cholecystectomy is most likely to be
due to common bile duct calculus that was missed at the time of surgery.


A 40-year-old man presents to the emergency department with a history
of sudden onset abdominal pain and vomiting. Serum amylase is
elevated. There is no previous history of pancreatitis. Select the most
likely diagnosis from the list of options below.
A. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas
B. Chronic pancreatitis
C. Biliary obstruction
D. Acute pancreatitis
E. Pancreatic pseudocyst.


ANSWER IS D
This clinical case scenario is typical of acute pancreatitis – sudden onset
of pain, vomiting and an increased serum amylase.


A 38-year-old obese lady presents to the emergency department with
right upper quadrant pain. Ultrasound scan shows a stone in the
Hartmann’s pouch and a distended thick-walled gallbladder. Select the
most likely diagnosis from the list of options below for this case.
A. Cholangiocarcinoma
B. Gall bladder calculi
C. Common bile duct calculus
D. Mucocele of the gall bladder
E. Empyema of the gall bladder.


183
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS D
In most instances where an open cholecystectomy is performed, an
intra-operative cholangiogram is performed, and a T-tube is left in situ. A
stone in Hartmann’s pouch (ie obstructing the cystic duct) causing right
quadrant upper pain is probably due to a mucocele.


A 57-year-old female is admitted under the general surgical team with
severe epigastric pain radiating to her back. She has a history of profuse
vomiting and a serum amylase comes back as 1200u/ml. She is
commenced on treatment for acute pancreatitis and further tests are
done. Bloods show a white cell count of 12x109/l, calcium 1.9mml/l, urea
17mmol/l, LDH 472 iu/l, Albumin 31g/l anda blood glucose of 11mmol/l.
An ABG has a PaO2 of 13.1kPa on room air. How severe is her
pancreatitis using the modified Glasgow criteria? Select one answer
only.
A. Mild
B. Moderate
C. Severe
D. Haemorrhagic
E. Necrotic.


ANSWER IS C
The modified Glasgow criteria can be used to assess the severity of
acute pancreatitis and can be remembered through the mnemonic:

PANCREAS. PaO2 8kPa Age > 55 year old Neutrophils WCC > 15 x
104/l Calcium <2mmol/l Renal Function Urea > 16mmul/l Enzymes LDH
>600iunits/:AST>200iu/l Albumin <32g/l Sugar blood glucose >10mmol/l

Mild=1 positive factor, moderate=2 factors, severe=3 positive factor. The
terms haemorrhagic and necrotic describe the CT appearance of the
pancreas.


A radiological scoring system that assesses pancreatic size,
inflammation and fluid collections; that does not use intravenous
contrast. Please choose the most appropriate answer from the list
below.

184
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A. APACHE II
B. Balthazar-Ranson grading system
C. Glasgow score = 2
D. Glasgow score = 3
E. Hong Kong scoring.


ANSWER IS B
The distinction between interstitial and necrotising pancreatitis cannot be
made unless intravenous contrast is used. A non-enhanced computed
tomography (CT) does provide important information in accordance with
the Balthazar-Ranson criteria of severity (graded A-E). When
intravenous contrast is used a 'CT severity index' can be used. This
index awards points on the basis of the CT grade and the amount of
necrosis. (NB Patients with a combined score of 7-10 have a higher
morbidity than those with a score < 7.) The commonest causes of acute
pancreatitis are gallstones (50-60% of attacks in the UK) and alcohol.
The rationale of a scoring system is to attempt to predict the presence of
severe disease, to allow patient series to be compared, and to permit
rational selection of patients for potential new treatment strategies.
Ranson's score (HC Ranson, 1974) is not commonly used in the UK
(this is a multiple-factor scoring system based on a North American
population with alcohol as the predominant aetiological factor). The
Glasgow score is a modification of Ranson's scoring system, and was
designed for use in a typical UK population with gallstone-predominant
disease. Both of these systems are limited in that they cannot be
completed immediately on admission; requiring 48 h of assessment. (A
score of greater than 3 indicates severe disease.) The Acute Physiology
and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE II, or more recently APACHE
III) has the advantage of being able to be employed daily, but is
extensive and time consuming (NB a score of > 8 implies severe
disease). Biochemical scoring methods eg C-reactive protein and the
Hong Kong system (based on glucose and urea); immunological
scoringg (interleukin-6); and radiological scoring (Balthazar-Ranson and
computed tomography severity system) also exist.


A 55-year-old male with a history of chronic pancreatitis secondary to
alcohol is being managed conservatively as an out-patient. It is decided
to assess the exocrine function of his pancreas prior to nutritional

185
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


interventions. Which of the following techniques is the best assessment
technique for the exocrine status of the pancreas? Select one answer
only.
A. Albumin levels
B. Barium meal
C. CT
D. Lundh meal
E. Ultrasound.


ANSWER IS D
The Lundh meal is a meal of skimmed milk powder mixed with corn oil
and dextrose used to assess pancreatic function. Following this serum
lipase measurements can provide a good indicator of exocrine
pancreatic status. A barium meal, CT and ultrasound don’t provide a
functional assessment of the pancreas, and serum albumin levels may
be decreased for many reasons e.g. inadequate diet, sepsis, nephrotic
syndrome. The faecal elastase test is increasingly used for detecting
exocrine insufficiency and is more acceptable to patients.


A 57-year-old male patient with known alcoholic liver disease, presents
with confusion and is generally unwell. On examination he is noted to
have a distended abdomen with shifting dullness. Imaging later confirms
a mass in his liver which is thought to be malignant in origin. What is the
most likely nature of this mass? Select one answer only.
A. Cholangiocarcinoma
B. Fibrolamellar carcinoma
C. Haemangioma
D. Haemangiosarcoma
E. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)


ANSWER IS E
HCC is the most common primary malignancy of the liver occurring
mainly on a background of cirrhosis. It may be detected through
screening – ultrasound and α fetoprotein (αFP) are used for this, or it
may be associated with a marked deterioration in patients with chronic
liver disease with encephalopathy, ascites and reduced synthetic


186
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


function. Fibrolamellar carcinoma is a rare variant of HCC affecting
children and young adults


A surgical registrar is performing his 3rd solo laparoscopic
cholecystectomy in a 47-year-old female. When attempting to dissect out
Calot’s triangle to identify the cystic artery great difficulty is experienced
as the anatomy appears aberrant. What proportion of patients have
anomalies of the gallbladder and biliary tree? Select one answer only.
A. <1%
B. 10%
C. 40%
D. 75%
E. >90%


ANSWER IS B
Calot’s triangle, also known as the cystohepatic or hepatobiliary triangle
is an anatomic space which is of great relevance when performing a
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. It is bounded by the common hepatic
duct medially, cystic duct laterally and liver superiorly, and is used to
locate the cystic artery which runs within. Anomalies of the gallbladder or
biliary tree are found within 10% of subjects and are important during
surgery. They include:A long cystic duct travelling alongside the
common hepatic duct. The gallbladder opening directly into the side of
the common bile duct i.e. the cystic duct is absent. Variation in the blood
vessel arrangement supplying the gallbladder e.g. in 25% of people the
right hepatic artery crosses in front of the common hepatic duct instead
of behind it.


A 45-year-old woman presents with a 2-day history of right upper
quadrant pain, rigors, nausea and vomiting. She is febrile and her
sclerae are noted to be yellow. Abdominal examination reveals a tender
right hypochondrium. Liver function tests: bilirubin 29 µmol/l, alkaline
phosphatase 450, aspartate aminotransferase 25 iu/litre. Ultrasound
demonstrates a common bile duct diameter of 8 mm with multiple stones
present. Choose the single most appropriate definitive
management option for this case.
A. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy + common bile duct exploration

187
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


B. Laparotomy with cholecystotomy/drainage
C. Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangio-Pancreatogram (ERCP) and
sphincterotomy
D. Open cholecystectomy + common bile duct exploration
E. Percutaneous (radiological) gallbladder drainage


ANSWER IS C
This lady is suffering from cholangitis as defined by Charcot’s triad. The
common bile duct is dilated (> 6– 7 mm). She requires urgent drainage.
This should be performed using ERCP with a laparoscopic
cholecystectomy deferred to a later date. Failure to clear the duct by
simple measures should prompt the use of a stent or, if this fails,
transhepatic drainage (percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram). Open
surgical drainage is rarely required.


A 34-year-old lady presents to the emergency department with a
palpable right upper quadrant mass, fever and being generally unwell.
Select the most likely diagnosis from the list of options below for this
case.
A. Cholangiocarcinoma
B. Gall bladder calculi
C. Common bile duct calculus
D. Mucocele of the gall bladder
E. Empyema of the gall bladder.


ANSWER IS E
A palpable right upper quadrant mass, fever and the feeling of being
generally unwell would point to an empyema of the gall bladder.


A 45-year-old woman undergoes a hysterectomy for fibroids. She
experiences a 1.5 litre intra-operative blood loss and requires a blood
transfusion. She makes slow post-operative progress and develops mild
jaundice and a low-grade fever. Select the single most likely diagnosis
from the options listed below.
A. Common bile duct damage
B. Biliary spasm

188
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


C. Acute pancreatitis
D. Transfusion reaction
E. Drug-induced biliary stasis.


ANSWER IS D
The patient who has had a hysterectomy and then develops a low grade
fever and mild jaundice following a blood transfusion is likely to have a
transfusion reaction.
A 79-year-old man with a history of ischaemic heart disease presents
with a 5-day history of progressive right upper quadrant pain. On
examination, he is clearly septic. Examination reveals a very tender
mass in the right upper quadrant. White cell count 21 x 109/litre. Choose
the single most appropriate definitive management option for this case.
A. Percutaneous (radiological) gallbladder drainage
B. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy + common bile duct exploration
C. Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangio-Pancreatogram (ERCP) and
sphincterotomy
D. Open cholecystectomy + common bile duct exploration
E. Early laparoscopic cholecystectomy +/- pre-operative
cholangiography


ANSWER IS A
In a fit person, empyema of the gallbladder (as presented here) might be
managed by emergency open cholecystectomy. Before the advent of
interventional radiology, if experience was not available, laparotomy
could be performed with open drainage. The best treatment, however, in
this case would be radiological drainage with antibiotics/resuscitative
measures, which will hopefully rectify the situation without recourse to
life threatening surgery. The management of symptomatic gallstone
disease has changed greatly over the last 20 years. It is an area of
contention in many respects, and many algorithms exist (especially for
the suspected bile duct stone) all of which have their merits. The final
decision probably rests with the experience of the surgeon and the
equipment available. The MRCS candidate might be advised to select
the simplest and safest answer where doubt exists. These are given
below.



189
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


A 52-year-old man, who is a heavy smoker and drinks 14 units/day,
presents to the emergency department with acute onset of epigastric
pain. He has a past history of chronic pancreatitis and steatorrhoea. On
examination, a central abdominal mass is palpable. Select the most
likely diagnosis from the list of options below.
A. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas
B. Chronic pancreatitis
C. Biliary obstruction
D. Acute pancreatitis
E. Pancreatic pseudocyst.


ANSWER IS E
This patient who is an alcoholic and with a history of chronic pancreatitis,
presenting with a palpable abdominal mass, would suggest a diagnosis
of a pancreatic pseudocyst.


A 3-year-old with leukaemia, presents with excessive salivation, marked
halitosis and a grey discolouration of the mucous membranes of his oral
cavity spreading to his palate and nose. What is the most likely bacteria
to be cultured? Select one answer only.
A. Borrelia vincenti
B. Klebsiella
C. Staphylococcus aureus
D. Staphylococcus epidermidis
E. Streptococcus pyogenes.


ANSWER IS A
This patient has signs of cancrum oris. 80% of patients with this are
younger than 10 years. The signs are of excessive salivation, grey
discolouration of the mucous membranes of the mouth, spreading to the
cheeks, palate and nose, and a strong odour. There are associations
between cancrum oris and measles, TB and whooping cough, amongst
others. In the majority of cases Borrelia vincenti and fusiform bacilli are
cultured. Anaerobes are frequently cultured in rapidly progressive cases.




190
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 50-year-old man presents with a white growth on the lateral aspect of
the middle third of his tongue, which has been slowly increasing in size.
He has enlarged lymph nodes. Which of the following is a risk factor for
this condition? Select one answer only.
A. Cytomegalovirus
B. Epstein Barr virus
C. Human papilloma virus (HPV)
D. Rotavirus
E. Varicella zoster.
ANSWER IS C
The patient has signs of oral cancer. The tongue is one of the
commonest sites for this and the majority of cases affect the middle
third. Common signs are a mass, which may cause pain, although this
tends to be a late sign. Leucoplakia is often seen (white patches on the
oral mucosa that cannot be rubbed off). Lymph node involvement is
common at presentation. Known risk factors include smoking, alcohol
excess, poor diet, HPV and immunosuppression


A 25-year-old male presents with enlargement of the left tonsil, which
has been gradually increasing in size for 2 months. The mass is
confined to the tonsil. Biopsy reveals this to be a sarcoma. What is the
most appropriate treatment? Select one answer only.
A. Chemotherapy
B. Phototherapy
C. Tonsillectomy
D. Tonsillectomy and radiotherapy
E. Watchful waiting


ANSWER IS D
A Sarcoma of the tonsil tends to present with unilateral tonsillar swelling.
It is a highly radiosensitive tumour, and sometimes small tumours are
treated with radiotherapy alone. If it is confined to the tonsil, then
excision can be achieved with tonsillectomy with radiotherapy to
decrease the chance of recurrence. Sarcoma of the tonsil is very rare.


Not uncommonly associated with bilateral cervical node metastasis at
presentation - choose the single most appropriate option from the list
191
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


below.
A. Fordyce's granules
B. Hairy leucoplakia
C. Tongue cancer
D. Erythroplakia
E. Chronic oral candidosis.


ANSWER IS C
Tongue cancer may present with cervical lymph node metastasis, and
bilateral nodal involvement is more common than tonsil cancer. Chronic
oral candidosis and lichen planus have low malignant potential (23%
over 5 years). Erythroplakia (also known as Erythroplasia but not to be
confused with 'erythoplasia of Queyrat‟, i.e. squamous-cell carcinoma in
situ of the glans penis) is a red lesion with a 20% risk of malignancy over
5 years


A 40-year-old male presents to the emergency department with a Le
Fort III fracture. His airway is obstructed and you are unable to disimpact
the facial bones forward. What is the best way to secure an urgent
airway? Select one answer only.
A. Bag and mask
B. Chin lift
C. Cricothyroidotomy
D. Oropharyngeal airway
E. Nasopharyngeal airway.
ANSWER IS C
The patient has a potentially unstable facial fracture that is likely to be
occluding the airway, and a bag and mask may worsen this with
pressure on the fracture fragments and is not a definitive airway. A chin
lift is likely to be ineffective as you cannot disimpact the fracture. The
oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal airways may also displace fracture.
The safest airway option is a cricothyroidotomy or emergency
tracheostomy.


A patient presents to the emergency department following an assault in
which he was hit in the face with a cricket bat. On examination he has
facial swelling. X-rays reveal a fracture that passes through the posterior
192
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


alveolar ridge, lateral walls of the maxillary sinuses, inferior orbital rim
and nasal bones. How would you classify this fracture? Select one
answer only.
A. Le Fort I
B. Le Fort II
C. Le Fort III
D. Le Fort IV
E. Nasal fracture.


ANSWER IS B
There are 3 types of Le Fort fracture. A Le Fort I detaches the palate
and maxillary alveolus. A Le Fort II is a pyramidal fracture passing
through the maxillary sinus walls laterally and nasal bones centrally. A
Le Fort III fracture detaches the facial skeleton from the base of the
skull. There is no 'Le Fort IV'. Le Fort fractures are most commonly seen
following car accidents, assaults or a fall, or as in this case, an incident
resulting in a patient being struck accidentally - always with considerable
force.


A 62-year-old man presents with a painful, chronic ulcerating lesion in
the left salivary gutter of the mouth. He has smoked 40 cigarettes per
day for the last 50 years, and consumes approximately 30 units of
alcohol each week. Select the most likely diagnosis for this case.
A. Carcinoma of the oral cavity
B. Mucous retention cyst
C. Pyogenic granuloma
D. Stomatitis
E. Sublingual dermoid cyst
 ANSWER IS A
Squamous cell carcinoma is the principal cancer of the oral cavity.
Aetiological factors include excessive Smoking and alcohol consumption
(Spirits), which have a synergistic effect on risk. A range of other factors,
including Syphilis, papillomavirus infection and repeated trauma (Sore
tooth), are suggested in the aetiology, although causative evidence is
lacking. The most common presenting features are ulceration, pain,
swelling and a neck lump. Tumours metastasise to the cervical lymph
nodes. Synchronous and metachronous tumours occur in 5% and 10%,

193
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


respectively. Surgery and/or radiotherapy are the mainstays of
treatment, the decision being based on the location and size of tumour.
A 31-year-old man attends The Emergency Department with a rapidly
growing painless lump affecting the inside of the lower lip. He has just
returned from a scuba-diving expedition in Australia 6 days ago. Select
the most likely diagnosis for this case.
A. Chronic superficial glossitis
B. Mucous retention cyst
C. Pyogenic granuloma
D. Stomatitis
E. Sublingual dermoid cyst
ANSWER IS C
The history of trauma (in this case secondary to the use of the mouth-
piece of breathing apparatus) and rapid growth are characteristic of this
condition. There is an overgrowth of granulation tissue, which gives rise
to a „nodular‟ lesion that may bleed or produce serous or purulent fluid.
Excision biopsy is necessary to confirm the diagnosis histologically.


A 26-year-old woman presents to clinic with a swelling „underneath her
tongue‟. She reports a slight increase in size over the last few months.
On examination, there is a soft, tense, translucent swelling in the floor of
the mouth. There is no evidence of cervical lymphadenopathy. Select
the most likely diagnosis for this case.
A. Ranula
B. Mucous retention cyst
C. Pyogenic granuloma
D. Stomatitis
E. Sublingual dermoid cyst


ANSWER IS A
A ranula is a large mucus-containing cyst in the floor of the mouth.
Ranula is Latin for a small frog, as the swelling is said to resemble the
„belly of a frog‟. A ranula develops on one side of the floor of the mouth,
and slowly enlarges to form a bluish fluctuant swelling beneath the
sublingual mucosa that transilluminates. The cysts have thin walls and
easily rupture. Treatment is by surgical excision, with care to avoid injury
to the submandibular duct or lingual nerve.

194
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


A 19 year old lady has a long standing history of diarrhoea and weight
loss. She is investigated with an upper gastro intestinal endoscopy
which is normal. A small bowel contrast study shows a terminal ileal
stricture. A colonoscopy was performed which was normal but the
endoscopist was unable to intubate the terminal ileum. One week after
the colonoscopy she is admitted with small bowel obstruction. Steroids
are administered but despite this she fails to improve. What is the most
appropriate treatment?
Administration of steroids at increased dose
Right hemicolectomy
Small bowel resection
Sub total colectomy
Pan proctocolectomy


ANSWER IS B
Crohns disease commonly affects the terminal ileum and in this case the
ileocaecal valve, this means some form of colonic resection will be
needed in addition to the small bowel resection.
It is likely that this lady has terminal ileal disease. Although first
presentation of Crohns disease is usually managed with IV steroids,
these have been trialed here and failed. A resection will remove the
stricturing disease. If proximal small bowel disease has not been
excluded pre-operatively then this must be evaluated during surgery to
exclude other small bowel strictures.


A 4 year old girl is admitted with lethargy and abdominal pain. On
examination, she is febrile, temperature 38.1oC, pulse rate is 150 and
blood pressure is 100/60. Her abdomen is soft but there is some right
sided peritonism. Her WCC is 14 and urinanalysis is positive for
leucocytes but is otherwise normal. What is the best course of action?
Mange as urinary tract infection with oral antibiotics
Manage as urinary tract infection with intravenous antibiotics
Take to theatre for appendicectomy within 6 hours
Undertake ultrasound scan
Admit for serial clinical examination
ANSWER IS C
Children with appendicitis do not localize in the same way as adults and
often the diagnosis is difficult and all too often made late. The findings of

195
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


right sided peritonism are ominous and the low grade fever and
tachycardia and WCC are strongly suggestive of appendicitis. The
findings of an isolated leukocytosis are suggestive of appendicitis over
UTI. The diagnosis of appendicitis is clinical and undertaking imaging is
not going to change management which should comprise
appendicectomy, this should be undertaken promptly.
A 76 year old man complains of symptoms of claudication. The decision
is made to measure his ankle brachial pressure index. The signal from
the dorsalis pedis artery is auscultated with a hand held doppler device.
This vessel is the continuation of which of the following?
Posterior tibial artery
Anterior tibial artery
Peroneal artery
Popliteal artery
None of the above
ANSWER IS B
The dorsalis pedis is a continuation of the anterior tibial artery.


Which of the following best accounts for the mechanism of action of
glucocorticoids?
Binding of cell wall receptors and intracellular tyrosine kinase activation
Binding of intracellular receptors that migrate to the nucleus to then
affect gene transcription
Activation of transmembrane tyrosine kinase systems to affect
intranuclear gene transcription
Induces post translational modification of intracellular proteins
Direct binding of inflammatory cells inducing apoptosis
ANSWER IS B
Glucocorticoids exert their effects by binding intracellular receptors than
are then transported to the nucleus where they affect gene transcription.
There are some questions in the MRCS now that seem to test common
pharmacology and so we have decided to include this. A detailed
knowledge of the mechanisms by which these effects occur is not
needed.


A 71 year old man presents with a painful lower calf ulcer, mild pitting
oedema and an ABPI of 0.3. What is the most likely cause?

196
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Mixed ulcer
Deep venous insufficiency
Chronic obliterative arterial disease
Squamous cell carcinoma
Neuropathic ulcer


ANSWER IS C
Painful ulcers associated with a low ABPI are usually arterial in nature.
The question does not indicate that features of chronic venous
insufficiency are present. Patients may have mild pitting oedema as
many vascular patients will also have ischaemic heart disease and
elevated right heart pressures. The absence of more compelling signs of
venous insufficiency makes a mixed ulcer less likely.


A 63 year old man is admitted with rest pain and foot ulceration. An
angiogram shows a 3 cm area of occlusion of the distal superficial
femoral artery with 3 vessel run off. His ankle - brachial pressure index is
0.4. What is the most appropriate course of action?
Conservative management with medical therapy and exercise
Arterial bypass surgery using PTFE
Arterial bypass surgery using vein
Primary amputation
Angioplasty

ANSWER IS E
Short segment disease and good run off with tissue loss is a compelling
indication for angioplasty. He should receive aspirin and a statin if not
already taking them.

A 2 year old boy is brought to the clinic by his mother who has noticed
that he has developed a small mass. On examination; a small smooth
cyst is identified which is located above the hyoid bone. On ultrasound
the lesion appears to be a heterogenous and multiloculated mass. What
is the most likely diagnosis?
Cystic hygroma
Thyroglossal cyst
Dermoid


197
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Branchial cyst
Rhabdomyosarcoma

ANSWER IS C
Dermoid cysts are usually multiloculated and heterogeneous. Most are
located above the hyoid, and their appearances on imaging differentiate
them from thyroglossal cysts.

A 55 year old man is involved in a stabbing and receives an injury to the
left iliac fossa. After transfer to hospital he is taken immediately to
theatre because of haemodynamic instability. At laparotomy, an injury to
the colonic mesentery is found to be the cause of blood loss, there is an
associated injury to the left colon with local perforation and
contamination. What is the most appropriate course of action?
Undertake a repair of the descending colon and place drains
Resect the left colon and perform an end to end anastomosis
Resect the left colon and construct a left iliac fossa end colostomy
Place an omental patch over the defect in the colon and drains adjacent
to this
Perform a sub total colectomy and end ileostomy

ANSWER IS C
Colonic injuries in the face of significant instability and contamination are
probably safest resected, particularly since the scenario alludes to the
presence of colonic mesenteric vascular injury which might compromise
attempt to heal a repair.

Which of the following blood gas results would fit with metabolic acidosis
with a compensatory respiratory alkalosis?
pH 7.36, PaCO2 7.3, PO2 8.9 (FiO2 40%), Bicarbonate 30.2, Base
excess +5.3
pH 7.14, PaCO2 7.4, PaO2 8.9 (FiO2 40%), Bicarbonate 14 mmol, Base
excess -10.6
pH 7.57, PaCO2 3.5, Pa O2 24.5 (FiO2 85%), Bicarbonate 23.5, Base
excess +1.8 mmol
pH 7.32, PCO2 3.8, PaO2 22.2 (FiO2 40%), Bicarbonate 19.1, Base
excess -7.9
pH 7.19, pCO2 10.2, pO2 16 (FiO2 85%), Bicarbonate 23.8, Base
excess -2.2 mmol

198
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A



ANSWER IS D



Arterial blood gas interpretation: -

In advanced life support training, a 5 step approach to arterial blood
gas interpretation is advocated.

1. How is the patient?

2. Is the patient hypoxaemic?
The Pa02 on air should be 10.0-13.0 kPa

3. Is the patient acidaemic (pH <7.35) or alkalaemic (pH >7.45)

4. What has happened to the PaCO2?
If there is acidaemia, an elevated PaCO2 will account for this

5. What is the bicarbonate level or base excess?
A metabolic acidosis will have a low bicarbonate level and a low
base excess (< -2 mmol)
A metabolic alkalosis will have a high bicarbonate and a high base
excess (> +2 mmol)

A 78 year old lady is admitted with a 3 hour history of passage of dark
red blood per rectum. Prior to this event, she was otherwise well with no
major medical co-morbidities. On examination, she has a mild
tachycardia but other vital signs are normal, abdomen is soft and non
tender. Digital rectal exam reveals dark blood but no other findings.
What is the most likely underlying cause?
Diverticular disease
Meckels diverticulum
Jejunal diverticulosis
Angiodysplasia of the colon
Colonic cancer
199
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS A
Diverticular disease is the commonest cause of lower GI bleeding in
adults.

A 60 year old male is admitted to the emergency room with a fall. He
lives with his wife and still works as a restaurant manager. He has a past
history of benign prostatic hypertrophy and is currently taking
tamsulosin. He is otherwise fit and healthy. On examination, there is
right hip tenderness on movement in all directions. A hip x-ray confirms
an intertrochanteric fracture. What is the best management option?
Cemented hemiarthroplasty
Total hip replacement
Dynamic hip screw
Percutaneous pinning
Leg traction

ANSWER IS C
The blood supply to the femoral head may be intact and the fracture
should heal with compression type devices such as gamma nails or
dynamic hip screws. The latter device being the most commonly
performed therapeutic intervention.

A 75 year old lady is admitted with a 12 hour history of absolute
constipation, vomiting and colicky abdominal pain. On examination, her
abdomen is distended and she has right sided tenderness. Imaging
demonstrates an obstructing hepatic flexure tumour with a caecal
diameter of 11cm. What is the best course of action?
Undertake an immediate laparotomy
Commence resuscitation with intravenous fluids and then undertake a
laparotomy 2-4 hours later
Administer antibiotics and intravenous fluids and schedule surgery for
the following day
Arrange a colonoscopy
Administer oral sodium picosulphate

ANSWER IS B
The sun should not rise and set on unrelieved large bowel obstruction!
This patient has a competent ileocaecal valve. As a result lack of


200
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


surgery would result in caecal perforation leading to faecal peritonitis
with and associated high mortality rate.

A 17 year old lady presents with right iliac fossa pain and diagnosed as
having acute appendicitis. You take her to theatre to perform a
laparoscopic appendicectomy. During the procedure the scrub nurse
distracts you and you inadvertently avulse the appendicular artery. The
ensuing haemorrhage is likely to be supplied directly from which vessel?
Inferior mesenteric artery
Superior mesenteric artery
Ileo-colic artery
Internal iliac artery
None of the above

The appendicular artery is a branch of the ileocolic artery.

A 55 year old man presents with symptoms of dyspepsia and on upper
GI endoscopy an area of patchy erythematous tissue is identified
extending proximally from the gastro oesophageal junction. A biopsy is
diagnostic of Barretts oesophagus with low grade dysplasia. Which of
the following is the most appropriate management?
Distal oesophagectomy
Upper GI endoscopy with quadrantic biopsies from the region
Photodynamic therapy
Endoscopic sub mucosal resection of the area
Argon plasma coagulation

 ANSWER IS B
 In Barrett's surveillance the safest option is quadrantic (i.e. 4 biopsies,
one from each quarter of the oesophagus at 2cm intervals)

Low grade dysplasia in conjunction with Barretts oesphagus should be
monitored with regular (6 monthly) upper GI endoscopy and quadrantic
biopsies. If the disease remains static at 2 years then the screening
frequency may be decreased.

Which of the following is not found within the deep perineal pouch in an
adult male?


201
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


Pudendal nerve
Dorsal nerve of the penis
Sphinter urethrae
Urethral artery
Obturator nerve
ANSWER IS E
Deep perineal pouch
The perineal pouch is surrounded inferiorly by the inferior fascia of the
urogenital diaphragm. This fascial boundary extends laterally to form the
medial wall of the ischiorectal fossa. The pouch is bounded superiorly by
the superior fascia of the urogenital diaphragm and this lies beneath the
levator ani muscle.

Contents of the deep perineal pouch
Urethral sphincter
Transversus perinei
Dorsal nerve of penis, muscular branches of the perineal nerve
Deep and dorsal arteries of penis, stem of origin of artery to the bulb of
penis, urethral artery.

A 75 year old man is admitted with large bowel obstruction and on
investigation is found to have a significant sigmoid diverticular stricture
as the underlying cause. What is the most appropriate treatment?
Colonoscopy and pneumatic dilatation of the stricture
Laparotomy and Hartmanns procedure
Colonoscopy and insertion of self expanding metallic stent
Loop ileostomy
Laparotomy, sigmoid colectomy and colorectal anastomosis

ANSWER IS B
Diverticular strictures have a high complication rate with stent insertion.
Where patients present with large bowel obstruction, the best option is to
resect the affected area. Given the fact that there is underlying colonic
obstruction, a primary anastomosis would be unwise. Diverticular
strictures should not be dilated.
An orthopaedic surgeon makes a modification to an operative approach
for total knee arthroplasty. After he has completed 25 cases, he stops
and reviews his patient outcomes. He publishes the data. What level of
evidence is supplied by this type of data?


202
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


II
IV
III
V
I
ANSWER IS B
Case series that are non randomised and lack concurrent controls at
best supply level IV evidence only. To qualify for level I and II evidence a
prospective randomised controlled trial with appropriate blinding, control
matching and power calculations is needed.

Which of the following would be the optimal fluid management option for
a 45 year old man due to undergo an elective right hemicolectomy?
Remain "nil by mouth" for at least 6 hours pre-operatively and avoid intra
venous fluids
Remain "nil by mouth" for at least 6 hours pre-operatively and receive
supplementary intravenous 5% dextrose to replace lost calories
Allow him free access to oral fluids only until 30 minutes prior to surgery
Administer a carbohydrate based loading drink 3 hours pre operatively,
and avoid intravenous fluids
Administer a carbohydrate based loading drink 6 hours pre-operatively
and administer 5% dextrose saline thereafter

ANSWER IS D
 Patients for elective surgery should not have solids for 6 hours pre-
operatively. However, clear fluids may be given up to 2 hours pre-
operatively. Enhanced recovery programmes are now the standard of
care in many countries around the world and involve administration of
carbohydrate loading drinks.
The routine administration of 5% dextrose in the scenarios given above
would convey little in the way of benefit and increase the risks of
electrolyte derangement post operatively.

A 34 year old man receives morphine following an appendicectomy. He
develops constipation as a result. Which of the following best accounts
for this process?
Stimulation of DOPA receptors
Inhibition of DOPA receptors
Stimulation of µ receptors


203
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Stimulation of serotonin release
Inhibition of serotonin release

ANSWER IS C
4 Types of opioid receptor:
δ (located in CNS)- Accounts for analgesic and antidepressant effects
k (mainly CNS)- analgesic and dissociative effects
µ (central and peripheral) - causes analgesia, miosis, decreased gut
motility
Nociceptin receptor (CNS)- Affect of appetite and tolerance to µ
agonists.
Constipation is a common side effect of morphine treatment and
stimulation of µ receptors accounts for this process.

A 17 year old lady presents with right iliac fossa pain and diagnosed as
having acute appendicitis. You take her to theatre to perform a
laparoscopic appendicectomy. During the procedure the scrub nurse
distracts you and you inadvertently avulse the appendicular artery. The
ensuing haemorrhage is likely to be supplied directly from which vessel?
Inferior mesenteric artery
Superior mesenteric artery
Ileo-colic artery
Internal iliac artery
None of the above

ANSWER IS C
The appendicular artery is a branch of the ileocolic artery.

A 25 year old female presents with a lump in her neck. On examination,
she has a discrete nodule in the right lobe of the thyroid. A fine needle
aspirate shows papillary cells. An adjacent nodule is also sampled which
shows similar well differentiated papillary cells. What is the most likely
cause?
Hashimotos thyroiditis
Papillary carcinoma
Follicular carcinoma
Medullary carcinoma
Thyroid B Cell lymphoma


204
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS B
Multifocal disease is a recognised feature of papillary lesions. Papillary
adenomas are not really recognised and most well differentiated lesions
are papillary carcinomas.

A 4 year old girl is admitted with lethargy and abdominal pain. On
examination, she is febrile, temperature 38.1oC, pulse rate is 150 and
blood pressure is 100/60. Her abdomen is soft but there is some right
sided peritonism. Her WCC is 14 and urinanalysis is positive for
leucocytes but is otherwise normal. What is the best course of action?
Mange as urinary tract infection with oral antibiotics
Manage as urinary tract infection with intravenous antibiotics
Take to theatre for appendicectomy within 6 hours
Undertake ultrasound scan
Admit for serial clinical examination

ANSWER IS C
Children with appendicitis do not localize in the same way as adults and
often the diagnosis is difficult and all too often made late. The findings of
right sided peritonism are ominous and the low grade fever and
tachycardia and WCC are strongly suggestive of appendicitis. The
findings of an isolated leukocytosis are suggestive of appendicitis over
UTI. The diagnosis of appendicitis is clinical and undertaking imaging is
not going to change management which should comprise
appendicectomy, this should be undertaken promptly.

Which of the following is not well absorbed following a gastrectomy?
Vitamin c
Zinc
Vitamin B12
Copper
Molybdenum

ANSWER IS C
Vitamin B12. The others are unaffected
Post gastrectomy syndrome
Rapid emptying of food from stomach into the duodenum: diarrhoea,
abdominal pain, hypoglycaemia
Complications: Vitamin B12 and iron malabsorption, osteoporosis
Treatment: High protein, low carbohydrate diet. Replace B12/Fe/Ca.



205
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


A 63 year old man who smokes heavily presents with dyspepsia. He is
tested and found to be positive for helicobacter pylori infection. One
evening he has an episode of haematemesis and collapses. What is the
most likely vessel to be responsible?
Portal vein
Short gastric arteries
Superior mesenteric artery
Gastroduodenal artery
None of the above

ANSWER IS D
He is most likely to have a posteriorly sited duodenal ulcer. These can
invade the gastroduodenal artery and present with major bleeding.
Although gastric ulcers may invade vessels they do not tend to produce
major bleeding of this nature.

An 18 year old male presents with lethargy, night sweats and on
examination is found to have left supraclavicular lymphadenopathy. A
surgical registrar performs a left supraclavicular lymph node biopsy. The
pathologist identifies Reed- Sternberg cells on the subsequent histology
sections, what is the most likely diagnosis?
Metastatic gastric cancer
Hodgkins lymphoma
Non Hodgkins lymphoma
Tuberculosis
None of the above
ANSWER IS B
Reed-Sternberg cells are characteristic histological cell type found in
Hodgkins disease
A 67 year old man is due to undergo a revisional total hip replacement
using a posterior approach. After dividing gluteus maximus in the line of
its fibres there is brisk arterial bleeding. Which of the following vessels is
likely to be responsible?
Profunda femoris artery
External iliac artery
Internal iliac artery
Obturator artery
Inferior gluteal artery



206
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS E
The inferior gluteal artery runs on the deep surface of the gluteus
maximus muscle. It is a branch of the internal iliac artery. It is commonly
divided during the posterior approach to the hip joint.

Which of the following statements in relation to fistula in ano is untrue?
High fistulae are safest treated with a seton insertion
Low fistulae may be laid open
They are typically probed with Lockhart Mummary probes
When discovered during incision and drainage of peri anal abscess;
should always be probed to locate the internal opening
When complicating Crohns disease, may respond to infliximab

ANSWER IS D
Probing fistulae during acute sepsis is associated with a high
complication rate and should not be undertaken routinely.

A 32 year old male presents with a swollen right scrotum which has
developed over 3 weeks after being kicked in the groin area. There is a
non tense swelling of the right scrotum and the underlying testis cannot
be easily palpated. A dipstick is positive for nitrates only. What is the
most likely diagnosis?
Epididymo-orchitis
Testicular torsion
Torsion of testicular appendage
Hydrocele
Haematocele
ANSWER IS D
Haematoceles develop over minutes/ hours and occur after the event

This is a secondary hydrocele which occurs in patients aged 20-40
years. It develops over days/ weeks and there may not be a tense
swelling. The underlying testis is NOT palpated therefore indicating a
hydrocele. Causes include trauma, infection and tumour.

Which of the following substances is commonly used to sterilize
endoscopic equipment?
Aqueous phenol
80% phenol
207
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Absolute alcohol
Glutaraldehyde
Gamma irradiation

ANSWER IS D
Most endoscopic processors use glutaraldehyde which is an effective
antimicrobial agent. It is widely recognized as being a cause of
hypersensitivity reactions and is thus used in closed systems.

Which of the vessels listed below is the most inferiorly sited single aortic
branch?
Common iliac artery
Inferior mesenteric artery
Superior mesenteric artery
Gonadal artery
Median sacral artery

ANSWER IS E
The median sacral artery leaves the aorta a little above its bifurcation. It
descends in the midline anterior to L4 and L5.

A consultant surgeon is undertaking increasingly complex neonatal
surgery. However, this is in breach of guidance following a series of
adverse outcomes. Previously it had been stated that these should be
performed with close supervision. Two further babies die and the
surgeon still refuses to undertake these procedures under supervision.
What is the correct course of action?
Review the cases at the next mortality and morbidity meeting
Discuss the situation with the coroner
Arrange for it to be discussed at the consultants next appraisal
Discuss the matter with the General Medical Council
Discuss the matter with the British Medical Association

ANSWER IS D
It is likely that the practice restrictions were imposed by the GMC and
given that there is an ongoing risk to patients and the surgeon is in
breach of those practice restrictions, it would be appropriate to raise this
with the GMC

208
      MCQS MRCS-A




209
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 43 year old lady undergoes a live related renal transplant. At the
conclusion of the operation she has a good urine output and the graft
appeared well perfused. On the ward she suddenly becomes anuric.
What is the most likely cause?
Renal artery stenosis
Renal vein thrombosis
Renal artery thrombosis
Hyperacute rejection
Acute rejection

ANSWER IS C
Sudden loss of urine output is most commonly due to a blocked
catheter. However, if this is excluded (and is not included in the options)
the most worrisome cause is arterial thrombosis. This will often be a
delayed diagnosis and the rate of graft loss is high.

A 70 year old lady presents with a painless neck lump. There is a mass
noted beneath the sternocleidomastoid muscle. There is a long history
and somewhat unkindly her husband remarked on her rather noticeable
halitosis. What is the most likely explanation?
Branchial cyst
Branchial fistula
Pharyngeal pouch
Thyroglossal cyst
Dental caries

ANSWER IS C
Usual history of regurgitation of undigested food or coughing at night.
Associated with halitosis and throat infections.

During a radical neck dissection, division of which of the following fascial
layers will expose the ansa cervicalis?
Pretracheal fascia
Carotid sheath
Prevertebral fascia
Investing layer of fascia
Sibsons fascia
ANSWER IS A


210
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


The ansa cervicalis lies anterior to the carotid sheath. It may be exposed
by division of the pretracheal fascia at the posterolateral aspect of the
thyroid gland. The pre vertebral fascia lies more posteriorly and division
of the investing layer of fascia will not expose this nerve.

A 72 year old man undergoes a distal gastrectomy for carcinoma of the
stomach. He presents with jaundice approximately 8 months post
operatively. Ultrasound of the liver and bile ducts shows no focal liver
lesion and normal calibre common bile duct with intra hepatic duct
dilatation. What is the most likely explanation?
Peri hilar lymphadenopathy
Fitz- Hugh Curtis syndrome
Gilberts syndrome
Mirizzi syndrome
Gallstones

ANSWER IS A
 Unfortunately metastatic disease is the most likely event. Peri hilar
lymphadenopathy would be a common culprit.

What is the substrate of renin?
Aldosterone
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin converting enzyme
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II

ANSWER IS B
Renin hydrolyses angiotensinogen to form angiotensin I.

A 45 year old lady has recently undergone a thyroidectomy for treatment
of medullary thyroid cancer. Which of the following tumour markers is
used clinically to screen for recurrence?
Free T3
Thyroglobulin
Calcitonin
Free T4
Thyroid stimulating hormone

211
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A



ANSWER IS C
Calcitonin is clinically utilised to screen for medullary thyroid cancer
recurrence. Thyroid function testing does not form part of either
diagnosis or follow up from a malignancy perspective. However, routine
assessment of TSH may be needed in patients on thyroxine.

A 60 year old alcoholic presents with worsening confusion over 2 weeks.
He has weakness of the left side of the body. What is the least likely
explanation?
Wernicke's encephalopathy and CVA
Extra dural haematoma
Decompensated liver failure and CVA
Sub dural haematoma
Vascular dementia
ANSWER IS B
Note the question asks for the least likely cause. There are many
reasons why an alcoholic may develop neurology. However, an extra
dural bleed would not typically present such a long latent period.

A 22 year old falls over and lands on a shard of glass. It penetrates the
palmar aspect of his hand, immediately lateral to the pisiform bone.
Which of the following structures is most likely to be injured?
Palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve
Lateral tendons of flexor digitorum superficialis
Ulnar artery
Flexor carpi radialis tendons
Lateral tendons of flexor digitorum profundus

ANSWER IS C
The ulnar nerve and artery are at most immediate risk in this injury.

An 62 year old man presents with dysphagia and on investigation is
found to have a stenosing tumour of the mid oesophagus with a single
metastasis in the right lobe of the liver (segment VI). What is the most
appropriate treatment?
Radical radiotherapy to the oesophagus and liver resection
Insertion of self-expanding metallic stent
Liver resection and subsequent oesophageal resection

212
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Oesophageal resection and subsequent liver resection
Combined oesophageal and liver resection if cardiopulmonary exercise
testing shows the patient is fit enough.

ANSWER IS B
Distant disease in patients with oesophageal cancer is a contra
indication to a resectional strategy and downstaging with chemotherapy
is not routinely undertaken in this age group as the results are poor. An
expanding stent will provide rapid and durable palliation.

A 75 year old lady is admitted with a 12 hour history of absolute
constipation, vomiting and colicky abdominal pain. On examination, her
abdomen is distended and she has right sided tenderness. Imaging
demonstrates an obstructing hepatic flexure tumour with a caecal
diameter of 11cm. What is the best course of action?
Undertake an immediate laparotomy
Commence resuscitation with intravenous fluids and then undertake a
laparotomy 2-4 hours later
Administer antibiotics and intravenous fluids and schedule surgery for
the following day
Arrange a colonoscopy
Administer oral sodium picosulphate

ANSWER IS B
The sun should not rise and set on unrelieved large bowel obstruction!
This patient has a competent ileocaecal valve. As a result lack of
surgery would result in caecal perforation leading to faecal peritonitis
with and associated high mortality rate.

A 23 year old rugby player falls directly onto his shoulder. There is pain
and swelling of the shoulder joint. The clavicle is prominent and there
appears to be a step deformity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Acromioclavicular joint dislocation
Glenohumeral dislocation
Sternoclavicular dislocation
Supraspinatus tear
Infra spinatus tear
ANSWER IS A


213
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


 Acromioclavicular joint (ACJ) dislocation normally occurs secondary to
direct injury to the superior aspect of the acromion. Loss of shoulder
contour and prominent clavicle are key features. Note; rotator cuff tears
rarely occur in the second decade.

What type of visual field defect is most likely to be noted in a patient with
a craniopharyngioma?
Lower bitemporal hemianopia
Upper bitemporal hemianopia
Right superior quadranopia
Right homonymous hemianopia
Left homonymous hemianopia

ANSWER IS A
Lesions at the optic chiasm classically produce a bitemporal
hemianopia, however note lesions that spread up from below ie pituitary
tumours, the defect is worse in the upper fields and if a lesion spreads
down from above ie craniopharyngiomas, the visual defect is worse in
the lower quadrants. Therefore this patient is likely to have a lower
bitemporal hemianopia.

During a pelvic lymphadenectomy, the common iliac vein is injured and
there is profuse bleeding. What is the best course of action?
Clamp the vessel to gain a better view and then ligate it
Occlude the bleeding point with digital pressure and consider direct
sutured repair with 5/0 polypropylene
Use diathermy at high coagulation current to stem the bleeding
Apply surgicell to the site and wait for bleeding to cease
Apply digital pressure to the vessel and suture the vessel with 2/0
polypropylene

ANSWER IS B
The use of digital pressure and careful sutured repair is the preferred
option.

A 19-year-old lady has a long standing history of diarrhoea and weight
loss. She is investigated with an upper gastro intestinal endoscopy
which is normal. A small bowel contrast study shows a terminal ileal
stricture. A colonoscopy was performed which was normal but the

214
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


endoscopist was unable to intubate the terminal ileum. One week after
the colonoscopy she is admitted with small bowel obstruction. Steroids
are administered but despite this she fails to improve. What is the most
appropriate treatment?
Administration of steroids at increased dose
Right hemicolectomy
Small bowel resection
Sub total colectomy
Pan proctocolectomy

ANSWER IS B
Crohns disease commonly affects the terminal ileum and in this case the
ileocaecal valve, this means some form of colonic resection will be
needed in addition to the small bowel resection.
It is likely that this lady has terminal ileal disease. Although first
presentation of Crohns disease is usually managed with IV steroids,
these have been trialed here and failed. A resection will remove the
stricturing disease. If proximal small bowel disease has not been
excluded pre-operatively then this must be evaluated during surgery to
exclude other small bowel strictures.

A 55-year-old man is involved in a stabbing and receives an injury to the
left iliac fossa. After transfer to hospital he is taken immediately to
theatre because of haemodynamic instability. At laparotomy, an injury to
the colonic mesentery is found to be the cause of blood loss, there is an
associated injury to the left colon with local perforation and
contamination. What is the most appropriate course of action?
Undertake a repair of the descending colon and place drains
Resect the left colon and perform an end to end anastomosis
Resect the left colon and construct a left iliac fossa end colostomy
Place an omental patch over the defect in the colon and drains adjacent
to this
Perform a sub total colectomy and end ileostomy.

ANSWER IS C
Colonic injuries in the face of significant instability and contamination are
probably safest resected, particularly since the scenario alludes to the
presence of colonic mesenteric vascular injury which might compromise
attempt to heal a repair.


215
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A 60-year-old male is admitted to the emergency room with a fall. He
lives with his wife and still works as a restaurant manager. He has a past
history of benign prostatic hypertrophy and is currently taking
tamsulosin. He is otherwise fit and healthy. On examination, there is
right hip tenderness on movement in all directions. A hip x-ray confirms
an intertrochanteric fracture. What is the best management option?
Cemented hemiarthroplasty
Total hip replacement
Dynamic hip screw
Percutaneous pinning
Leg traction.

ANSWER IS C
The blood supply to the femoral head may be intact and the fracture
should heal with compression type devices such as gamma nails or
dynamic hip screws. The latter device being the most commonly
performed therapeutic intervention.

A 39-year-old lady presents with a mass lesion in her right breast.
Clinical examination, biopsy and imaging confirm a 2.5 cm lesion in the
upper inner quadrant of her right breast and a 1.5 cm lesion at the
central aspect of the same breast. Her axilla shows lymphadenopathy
and a fine needle aspirate from the node shows malignant cells. What is
the best course of action?
Simple mastectomy and axillary node clearance
Wide local excisions of the two lesions and axillary node clearance
Simple mastectomy and sentinel node biopsy
Wide local excisions of the two lesions and sentinel node biopsy
Radical mastectomy and axillary node clearance.

ANSWER IS A
Multifocal breast cancer is best treated with mastectomy

A combination of established axillary disease and multifocal invasive
lesions attracts an indication for mastectomy and axillary clearance. A
radical mastectomy is less frequently indicated in modern surgical
practice, disease that is locally advanced is often best downstaged using
medical therapy, rather than embarking on the operations for breast
cancer that were first popularised over 100 years ago.


216
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 4-year-old girl is admitted with lethargy and abdominal pain. On
examination, she is febrile, temperature 38.1oC, pulse rate is 150 and
blood pressure is 100/60. Her abdomen is soft but there is some right
sided peritonism. Her WCC is 14 and urinanalysis is positive for
leucocytes but is otherwise normal. What is the best course of action?
Mange as urinary tract infection with oral antibiotics
Manage as urinary tract infection with intravenous antibiotics
Take to theatre for appendicectomy within 6 hours
Undertake ultrasound scan
Admit for serial clinical examination

ANSWER IS C
Children with appendicitis do not localize in the same way as adults and
often the diagnosis is difficult and all too often made late. The findings of
right sided peritonism are ominous and the low grade fever and
tachycardia and WCC are strongly suggestive of appendicitis. The
findings of an isolated leukocytosis are suggestive of appendicitis over
UTI. The diagnosis of appendicitis is clinical and undertaking imaging is
not going to change management which should comprise
appendicectomy, this should be undertaken promptly.

A 71-year-old man presents with a painful lower calf ulcer, mild pitting
oedema and an ABPI of 0.3. What is the most likely cause?
Mixed ulcer
Deep venous insufficiency
Chronic obliterative arterial disease
Squamous cell carcinoma
Neuropathic ulcer
ANSWER IS C
Painful ulcers associated with a low ABPI are usually arterial in nature.
The question does not indicate that features of chronic venous
insufficiency are present. Patients may have mild pitting oedema as
many vascular patients will also have ischaemic heart disease and
elevated right heart pressures. The absence of more compelling signs of
venous insufficiency makes a mixed ulcer less likely.

A 19-year-old lady has a long standing history of diarrhoea and weight
loss. She is investigated with an upper gastro intestinal endoscopy
which is normal. A small bowel contrast study shows a terminal ileal
stricture. A colonoscopy was performed which was normal but the
217
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


endoscopist was unable to intubate the terminal ileum. One week after
the colonoscopy she is admitted with small bowel obstruction. Steroids
are administered but despite this she fails to improve. What is the most
appropriate treatment?
Administration of steroids at increased dose
Right hemicolectomy
Small bowel resection
Sub total colectomy
Pan proctocolectomy

ANSWER IS B
Crohns disease commonly affects the terminal ileum and in this case the
ileocaecal valve, this means some form of colonic resection will be
needed in addition to the small bowel resection.
It is likely that this lady has terminal ileal disease. Although first
presentation of Crohns disease is usually managed with IV steroids,
these have been trialed here and failed. A resection will remove the
stricturing disease. If proximal small bowel disease has not been
excluded pre-operatively then this must be evaluated during surgery to
exclude other small bowel strictures.

A 38-year-old woman with an extensive malignant growth in the anterior
wall of the vagina is most likely to have involvement of which adjacent
structure? Single best answer question – choose ONE true option only.
A. Anal canal
B. Fundus of the bladder
C. Perineal body
D. Rectum
E. Rectovesical fascia.

ANSWER IS B
The anterior surface of the vagina is related to the fundus of the bladder
and the urethra. A growth in the anterior wall is therefore most likely to
involve the fundus of the urinary bladder and/or the urethra. The
posterior surface is separated from the rectum by the rectouterine pouch
in its upper quarter and by the rectovesical fascia in its middle two
quarters, while the lower quarter is separated from the anal canal by the
perineal body.
Its sides are enclosed between the levatores ani muscles. As the
terminal portions of the ureters pass forward and medially to reach the
fundus of the bladder, they run close to the lateral fornices of the vagina
218
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


and as they enter the bladder they are slightly anterior to the anterior
fornix.

You see a 55-year-old man with end-stage renal failure. He says his
father also had problems with his kidneys. On examination he has
bilateral balottable masses in his flanks. Select the most likely diagnosis.
A. Chronic glomerulonephritis
B. Diabetes mellitus
C. Hypertensive nephrosclerosis
D. Chronic interstitial nephritis
E. Polycystic kidney disease.

ANSWER IS E
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is one of the
most common inherited disorders in humans. It is the most frequent
genetic cause of renal failure in adults.

A 54-year-old female with chronic glomerulonephritis requires a renal
transplant as she has end stage renal failure. The renal artery and vein
of the donor are most likely to be anastomosed to which vessels of the
recipient in end to side anastomosis? Select one answer only.
A. Aorta and inferior vena cava
B. External iliac artery and vein
C. Femoral artery and vein
D. Internal iliac artery and vein
E. Renal artery and vein.

ANSWER IS B
The kidney is placed extraperitoneally in the right or left iliac fossa,
usually on the right side (dictated by existing scars or previous
transplants and because it is relatively straightforward to access for
biopsies and surgery in the event of post-operative problems). Renal
vessels are anastomosed (end to side) to the recipient‟s external iliac
verssels. The ureter is taken down into the pelvis where it is
anastomosed to the bladder mucosa, either directly (extravesical
approach) or by threading it through a submucosal tunnel and suturing
from inside the bladder through a separate incision in the bladder wall
(intravesical approach).




219
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A 21-year-old man is brought into A&E unresponsive after being stabbed
in the chest. On examination the knife has been left in place and is
entering through the 4th intercostal space on the left of the sternum. He
has a heart rate of 140 and his BP is 70/30. He is noted to have a
central trachea, distended neck veins. He has normal breath sounds
bilaterally, but muffled heart sounds. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Select one answer only.
A. Aortic dissection
B. Cardiac tamponade
C. Haemothorax
D. Pneumothorax
E. Tension pneumothorax.

ANSWER IS B
ECG is useful to detect dysrhythmias and pulseless electrical activity
(PEA). There is no indication for routine exploratory thoracotomy within 1
hour. An urgent exploratory thoracotomy should be performed if 1500 ml
of blood is drained immediately from the chest drain or 200 ml/h for 2–4
hours. A normal appearance of the cardiac shadow on CXR is
insufficient to exclude a tamponade.
Echocardiography and computed tomography (CT) are more sensitive
methods. Neck veins should be assessed for distension. Beck‟s triad for
cardiac tamponade consists of muffled heart sounds, hypotension and
distended neck veins. Tension pneumothorax is a clinical diagnosis
requiring immediate management.
Aortic dissection classically causes a tearing chest pain radiating
through to the back. On examination, the patient can have a variety of
symptoms depending on which part of the aorta (and therefore who
branches) are affected. If the common carotid artery is affected they may
have a neurological signs, there may be signs in the upper limb if the
subclavian arteries are affected.
If the dissection involves the abdominal aorta, the patient may have
abdominal signs or oliguria/ anuria if the renal arteries are affected.
Classically, there may be a difference in blood pressure between the
arms due to subclavian artery involvement on one side.
A haemothorax would cause chest signs on examination- reduced or
absent air/entry and dullness to percussion, this helps to differentiate it
from a pneumothorax in which air entry may also be reduced or absent,
but percussion is hyper-resonant. In tension pneumothorax a valve like
mechanism allows the accumulation of air in the pleural space which
causes medistinal displacement- thus affecting venous return to the
heart and therefore cardiac output.

220
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


It will lead to severe shortness of breath, tracheal deviation, dilated neck
veins and ultimately cardiac arrest. The diagnosis is clinical, and
management should not be delayed for a chest X ray.

When making an incision for an inguinal hernia repair, the vessels which
may be encountered beneath Camper‟s fascia are: Single best answer
question – choose ONE true option only.
A. The accessory obturator vein
B. The gonadal vein
C. The superficial inferior epigastric artery and vein
D. The superficial circumflex iliac artery and vein
E. None of the above.

 ANSWER IS C
The superficial fascia just superior to the inguinal ligament can be
divided into two layers: i. a superficial fatty layer (Camper‟s fascia) and
ii. a membranous deep layer (Scarpa‟s fascia). The superficial vessels
and nerves are located between these two layers of superficial fascia.
One should be mindful of the superficial inferior epigastric vessels when
cutting through Camper‟s as failure to do so can lead to troublesome
bleeding.

A 25-year-old man from Uganda presents with a high anal fistula. He is a
non-smoker who has had a chronic cough for 3 months and has noticed
weight loss of 2 stone. What is the most likely associated condition
leading to this high anal fistula? Select one answer only.
A. Carcinoma
B. Crohn’s disease
C. Diverticular disease
D. Tuberculosis
E. Ulcerative colitis.

ANSWER IS D
High fistulae are uncommon but may be due to carcinoma, diverticular
disease, tuberculosis, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, trauma or
radiotherapy. The most likely condition that this patient is suffering from
is tuberculosis. TB is endemic in Uganda, and often presents with
pulmonary symptoms, and weight loss.
You are assisting with a renal allograft transplantation. Once perfusion of
the kidney is established it becomes grossly mottled and cyanotic. The

221
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


capsule begins to bulge. Select the most likely answer for this case.
A. Accelerated rejection
B. Acute rejection
C. Chronic rejection
D. Hyperacute rejection
E. Not undergoing rejection

ANSWER IS D
The kidney is undergoing antibody mediated hyperacute rejection. This
generally occurs within 24 h of the operation. In severe cases it can
occur following perfusion of the allograft. It is an irreversible process and
the patient will have to restart dialysis.

You receive the histopathology report for a patient who you suspect is
rejecting the kidney transplant received 90 days ago. The findings are of,
‘transmural arteritis and transmural fibrinoid change with necrosis of
smooth muscle cells’. Select the most likely answer for this case.
A. Accelerated rejection
B. Acute rejection
C. Chronic rejection
D. Hyperacute rejection
E. Severe acute rejection

ANSWER IS E
Acute rejection occurs between a week and 100 days following
transplantation. The severity of rejection can be assessed by taking a
needle biopsy of the allograft. Acute rejection is recognised by the
presence of tubulitis and intimal arteritis. The Banff System can be used
to classify acute rejection into mild, moderate, and severe. The category
depends on the intensity of the infiltrate, and the severity of tubulitis and
intimal arteritis. In this case there was also necrosis of muscle cells
which means it is grade 3 and therefore severe acute rejection.

An 82-year old man develops hilar lymphadenopathy secondary to a
haematological malignancy. This affects predominantly the superior
aspect of the right main bronchus. Which of the following structures is
most likely to be compressed? Select one answer only.
A. The azygos vein
B. The hemiazygos nerve
C. The right phrenic nerve

222
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


D. The right recurrent laryngeal nerve
E. The right vagus nerve.

 ANSWER IS A
The vagus nerve lies just posterior to the right main bronchus and the
azygos vein is at first posterior and then arches over the superior aspect
of the right main bronchus to join the SVC. The phrenic nerve is anterior
to the bronchus. The right recurrent laryngeal nerve hooks around the
right subclavian artery superior to the right main bronchus

A 51-year-old Asian woman is seen in clinic. She is complaining of
feeling tired and passing foamy urine. On examination she has ankle
swelling. Her urine is positive for glucose and protein. Select the most
likely diagnosis.
A. Chronic glomerulonephritis
B. Diabetes mellitus
C. Hypertensive nephrosclerosis
D. Chronic interstitial nephritis
E. Polycystic kidney disease

ANSWER IS B
Diabetic nephropathy is the leading cause of chronic renal failure in
Western societies. It is also one of the most significant long-term
complications in terms of morbidity and mortality for individual patients
with diabetes. Diabetes is responsible for 30–40% of all end-stage renal
disease.

A 64-year-old male who underwent a liver transplant 6 years earlier
presents to his GP with a lesion on his lower lip that bleeds
intermittently. On examination it is a small ulcerated lesion with raised
edges. He reports it has been present for 4 months and is not healing.
What is the most likely nature of this lesion? Select one answer only.
A. Candida albicans
B. Kaposi sarcoma
C. Melanoma
D. Squamous cell carcinoma
E. Gingival hypertrophy.

ANSWER IS D
Long term immunosuppression for successful organ transplantation

223
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


carries a number of important side effects such as malignant disease in
particular squamous cell carcinoma. This has a number of different
appearances, but is can be a non-healing ulcer often with slightly
everted edges. Transplant patients are often followed up long term to
screen for the development of skin cancers secondary to
immunosuppression.

You are referred a patient by their general practitioner (GP). They
underwent a renal transplantation 3 years ago. The patient has been
complaining of headaches and dizzy spells. The GP reports an abrupt
onset of unexplained hypertension. Select the most likely complication
for this case.
A. Acute graft rejection
B. Chronic graft rejection
C. Delayed graft function
D. Lymphocele
E. Renal artery stenosis

ANSWER IS E
Renal artery stenosis complicates 2–10% of renal transplants. It may be
confirmed on Doppler ultrasound. It can be managed using
percutaneous angioplasty and stent placement.

A 78-year-old lady has been admitted for a mastectomy and sentinel
node procedure for a large area of screen detected ductal carcinoma in
situ. You have been asked to mark out the borders of the breast. Which
of the following statements is accurate regarding the mammary gland?
Single best answer – Select one answer only.
A. Contains 15 main lactiferous ducts that drain separately at the nipple
B. Is mainly supplied by the lateral thoracic artery and internal mammary
artery
C. In this age group is best visualised by a combination of crainiocaudal
and true mediolateral mammograms
D. Is a modified sebaceous gland
E. Predominantly drains to the internal thoracic nodes.

ANSWER IS B
The breast lies on the pectoralis major, serratus anterior and external
oblique muscles. It is a modified apocrine sweat gland. The mammary
gland is mainly supplied by the lateral thoracic artery, by branches that
curl around the border of pectoralis major. In addition, there is a blood
224
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


supply from the internal thoracic artery, intercostal and thoracoacromial
arteries.
The main lymphatic drainage is to the axillary and infraclavicular nodes
in 75% of cases whereas the majority of the medial breast drains to
nodes which lie along the internal thoracic artery. The gland contains
approximately 15-20 main ducts that open separately on the summit of
the nipple. Screening mammograms involve craniocaudal and
mediolateral oblique views which are double read by consultant
radiologists.

A 45-year-old female is undergoing a liver transplant for advanced
primary biliary cirrhosis after a failure to respond to medical therapy. It is
decided to perform a piggy-back transplant. What will the donor inferior
vena cava be anastomosed to in this case? Select one answer only.
A. Azygos vein
B. Hepatic vein
C. Inferior vena cava
D. Renal vein
E. Splenic vein

ANSWER IS B
In a conventional liver transplant the donor inferior vena cava (IVC) is
anastomosed to the recipient IVC and this entails an inevitable
anhepatic phase of transplantation. This carries a number of potential
problems such as reducing venous return to the heart and possibly
causing portal venous congestion. To reduce these potential problems,
venovenous bypass has been used. This however can also contribute to
problems relating to the use of an extra-corporeal circuit e.g.
hypothermia and vascular access problems e.g. lymphocoele formation.
The use of piggy back transplantation has therefore been developed,
this involves anastomosing the donor‟s suprahepatic vena cava to the
recipient hepatic veins.

A 57-year-old male received a renal transplant from an unrelated donor
15 years earlier and has had no rejection problems post-operative. He is
noted by his dentist during a routine check-up to have gingival
hypertrophy. Which of his medications is likely to be causing this? Select
one answer only.
A. Azathioprine
B. Cyclosporin
C. Mycophenolatemofetil

225
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


D. Prednisolone
E. Rituximab.

ANSWER IS B
All immunosuppressive medications carry important side effects, it is
important to be aware of these. Azathioprine can cause
myelosuppression and acute pancreatitis. Steroids such as prednisolone
carry numerous side effects such as Cushing‟s syndrome. Cyclosporin
can cause gingival hypertrophy in addition to nephrotoxicity,
hepatotoxicity and neurotoxicity. Mycophenolatemofetil can also cause
bone marrow suppression and patients require regular full blood counts
upon starting it. Rituximab is a monoclonal anitibody that can also be
used for lymphomas. Its can cause cardiac problems such as
exacerbation of angina, heart failure and arrhythmias.

A 35-year-old male receives a renal transplant from an unrelated donor
for dialysis-dependent renal disease. The transplanted organ is placed in
the right iliac fossa. What type of transplant is this? Select one answer
only.
A. Autograft
B. Isograft
C. Heterotopic graft
D. Orthotopic graft
E. Xenograft.

ANSWER IS C
Important terms to understand in transplant surgery are as follows: 1.
Autograft - transplant of tissue from one location to another in the same
individual 2. Isograft - transplant of tissue between genetically identical
individuals e.g. identical twins 3. Allograft - transplantation of an organ or
tissue between genetically different individuals from the same species 4.
Xenograft - transplantation of organs between different species 5.
Orthotopic graft - transplantation of a donor organ to the same
anatomical site in a recipient 6. Heterotopic graft - transplantation of a
donor organ to a different anatomical site than that of the existing
kidneys in a recipient.

A 19-year-old accidentally cuts her lateral forearm on a bread knife. On
surgical exploration she has divided her cephalic vein. Which one of the
following is correct?
A. Drains into the subclavian vein
226
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


B. Forms in the anatomical snuff box
C. Has a tributary called the basilic vein
D. Is medial to the distal biceps tendon
E. Runs between deltoid and pectoralis minor.

ANSWER IS B
The cephalic vein forms in the anatomical snuffbox, it runs up the lateral
forearm and at the antecubital fossa, it lies lateral to the distal tendon of
biceps. It passes through the upper arm lying lateral to biceps before
running through the deltopectoral groove (deltoid and pectoralis major)
and then joining the axillary vein. The basilic vein runs up the medial
border of the upper limb, becoming the axillary vein at the lower border
of teres major.

An 18-year-old female basket player presents 2 weeks after sustaining a
knee injury while landing from a jump. There was an audible popping
sound at the time of injury and she developed swelling later that
evening. On physical examination, she has a positive Lachman test.
What is the origin and insertion of the damaged ligament?
A. From intercondylar notch on lateral femoral condyle to tibia
B. From intercondylar notch on medial femoral condyle to tibia
C. From lateral femoral condyle to fibula
D. From medial femoral epicondyle to medial meniscus
E. From medial femoral epicondyle to proximal tibia.

ANSWER IS A
The Lachman test is used for examination of the Anterior Cruciate
Ligament (ACL) where there is suspicion of a torn ACL. The ACL is
attached to the anterior intercondylar area of the tibia and passes
upwards, backwards and laterally to the medial surface of the lateral
femoral condyle.
The posterior cruciate ligament is attached to the posterior intercondylar
area of the tibia and passes upwards, forwards and medially to the
lateral surface of the medial femoral condyle. Both cruciate ligaments
are intracapsular but extrasynovial.
The medial meniscus is attached to the medial collateral ligament but
the lateral collateral ligament is not attached to the lateral meniscus as
the popliteus muscle runs between them.

26-year-old primigravida aborted a 5-week-old embryo. On gross
examination: Single best answer question – choose ONE true option
227
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


only.
A. The embryo is markedly curved on itself
B. The elevations that form the rudiments of the auricula are visible
C. The primitive segments number about 30
D. The limbs appear as oval flattened projections
E. The cloacal tubercle is evident

ANSWER IS E
During the fifth week the embryo is less curved and the head is relatively
large. Differentiation of the limbs into their segments occurs. The nose
forms a short, flattened projection. The cloacal tubercle is evident.

A 2-year-old boy presents with a large mass in the left flank and
proceeds to laparotomy with excision of Wilms‟ tumour. During the
procedure, the lienorenal ligament is divided. Which vessels are carried
by this ligament?
A. Left colic
B. Left gastric
C. Pancreaticoduodenal
D. Renal
E. Splenic

ANSWER IS E
The lienorenal ligament connects the hilum of the spleen to the left
kidney. The splenic artery and vein are carried within it, as is the
pancreatic tail. Wilms‟ tumour (nephroblastoma) is the commonest type
of renal tumour of childhood, representing 20% of all childhood
malignancies.

6 months following transplantation a patient is seen in clinic with a mild
swelling and tenderness in the region of the transplant. Their renal
function has deteriorated. A computed tomography (CT) scan
demonstrates a collection between the lower pole of the kidney and
bladder. Select the most likely complication for this case.
A. Acute graft rejection
B. Chronic graft rejection
C. Delayed graft function
D. Lymphocele
E. Renal artery stenosis



228
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS D
Leakage from perivascular lymphatic vessels can lead to significant
collections of lymph between the lower pole of the transplanted kidney
and the bladder. A lymphocele can present as pain, swelling and
impaired renal function within the first year following transplantation.
Treatment is by drainage. Percutaneous drainage has a high infection
risk and is rarely successful, due to a high recurrence rate. Laparoscopic
drainage of the collection in to the abdominal cavity is the treatment of
choice.

You review a 50-year-old man in clinic. He had a renal transplantation
200 days ago. He feels tired but otherwise well. His renal function is
deteriorating, and he has developed proteinuria. Select the most likely
answer for this case.
A. Accelerated rejection
B. Acute rejection
C. Chronic rejection
D. Hyperacute rejection
E. Severe acute rejection

ANSWER IS C
This gentleman has chronic allograft nephropathy. It is characterised by
slowly progressive graft dysfunction which leads to chronic renal failure.
In addition, many patients develop nephrotic-range proteinuria.
Histopathological examination of a renal allograft biopsy may show
varying combinations of lesions. These include: chronic transplant
glomerulopathy, ischaemic glomerulopathy, interstitial fibrosis, tubular
atrophy, arteriosclerosis and arteriolar hyalinosis.

You review a 45-year-old woman on the ward round. She had a renal
transplantation 5 days ago. She is complaining of some discomfort in the
region of the transplant. Her renal function had been improving but has
now deteriorated over the last two days. Select the most likely answer
for this case.
A. Accelerated rejection
B. Acute rejection
C. Chronic rejection
D. Hyperacute rejection
E. Not undergoing rejection



229
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS A
Accelerated rejection develops up to a week after transplantation. It is
generally due to cell-mediated immune injury. Both delayed
hypersensitivity and cytotoxicity mechanisms are likely to be involved. It
is usually irreversible.

A 50-year-old woman is seen in the renal clinic. She has been referred
because of a raised creatinine and mild proteinuria. She has been taking
long-term non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for low back pain. Select
the most likely diagnosis.
A. Chronic glomerulonephritis
B. Diabetes mellitus
C. Hypertensive nephrosclerosis
D. Chronic interstitial nephritis
E. Polycystic kidney disease.

ANSWER IS D
Analgesic nephropathy is the most common cause of chronic interstitial
nephritis worldwide. It has an insidious nature and is often diagnosed
incidentally on routine blood tests or evaluation of hypertension. Patients
are usually asymptomatic. Clinical investigations may show modest
elevation in serum creatinine and evidence of renal tubular acidosis.
Proteinuria is usually mild (<1 g/dl).

You are examining a patient in clinic who is referred by the GP with a
swelling in the neck. The posterior triangle of the neck contains the:
A. Facial nerve
B. Great auricular nerve
C. Omohyoid muscle
D. Roots of the brachial plexus
E. Vertebral artery.

ANSWER IS C
The great auricular nerve turns upwards round the lateral border of the
sternocleidomastoid muscle outside the triangle. The posterior belly of
the omohyoid muscle and its intermediate tendon pass diagonally
through the triangle (they are palpable, often confused with both the
upper trunk of the brachial plexus and the suprascapular nerve), and the
clavicular (intermediate) and acromial (lateral) branches of the
supraclavicular nerves course through the roof.
Lying medially, outside the triangle, are the roots of the brachial plexus,
230
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


sandwiched between the scalenus anterior and medius muscles. The
vertebral artery lies within the pyramidal space inferiorly, before
ascending through the foramen transversarium of the C1–C6 vertebrae.
Other components of the posterior triangle include the semispinalis
capitis, splenius capitis, levator scapulae and scalenus medius muscles
and the spinal accessory nerve.

A 79-year-old male presents with difficulty in passing urine and is
diagnosed with prostatic adenocarcinoma. From which histological
structure is his disease most likely to have originated? Single best
answer - select one answer only.
A. Anterior fibromuscular zone
B. Central zone
C. Peripheral zone
D. Prostatic urethra
E. Transitional zone
ANSWER IS C
The peripheral zone of the prostate contains around 75% of all the
glandular tissue. Accordingly, 80% of all prostate cancers originate here.
10-20% of cancers originate within the transitional zone, and 2.5% within
the central zone. The anterior fibromuscular zone contains no glandular
tissue.

You see a 48-year-old man on the ward who is awaiting a renal
transplantation. He is receiving haemodialysis. He is anaemic and is
being treated for hypertension. He has proteinuria of >1g/day. His renal
biopsy showed his renal tubules were disrupted and atrophic with
marked interstitial fibrosis and arterial and arteriolar sclerosis. Select the
most likely diagnosis.
A. Chronic glomerulonephritis
B. Diabetes mellitus
C. Hypertensive nephrosclerosis
D. Chronic interstitial nephritis
E. Polycystic kidney disease.

ANSWER IS A
Chronic glomerulonephritis is characterised by irreversible and
progressive glomerular and tubulointerstitial fibrosis, ultimately leading to
a reduction in the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and retention of toxins.



231
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


An 82-year-old man undergoes a left carotid endarterectomy under
general anaesthetic. The operation is noted to be very difficult due to the
high bifurcation of the common carotid artery. Post-operatively has
speech is difficult to understand, and it is noted on protruding his tongue,
it deviates to the left. Which nerve is most likely to be affected?
A. Ansacervicalis
B. Facial
C. Glossopharyngeal
D. Hypoglossal
E. Spinal accessory.

ANSWER IS D
The carotid sheath contains neurovascular structures and is situated
between the vertebral and visceral compartments of the neck. The
sheath contains the common carotid artery, which branches into the
internal and external carotid arteries at the upper border of the thyroid
cartilage. The internal carotid artery has no branches in the neck,
whereas the external carotid artery has six branches in the neck.
The carotid body is a chemoreceptor located at the bifurcation of the
common carotid artery that monitors arterial levels of oxygen and carbon
dioxide. The vagus nerve courses through the length of the neck in the
carotid sheath. The glossopharyngeal, accessory and hypoglossal
nerves pass through the superior part of the sheath in their course to the
pharynx, posterior triangle and tongue respectively.
The hypoglossal nerve supplies all of the muscles of the tongue except
palatoglossus, which is supplied by the pharyngeal plexus and
accessory nerve. Due to it‟s insertion on the posterolateral aspect of the
tongue, if unopposed palatoglossus will deviate the tongue laterally.

A 46-year-old male presents with an acutely painful left groin. He is
tender over the affected area and you notice that his swelling originates
inferior and lateral to the pubic tubercle. What is the most likely
diagnosis? Single best answer - select one answer only.
A. Direct inguinal hernia
B. Femoral hernia
C. Indirect inguinal hernia
D. Obturator hernia
E. Spigelian hernia.

ANSWER IS B
Femoral hernias always arise inferior and lateral to the pubic tubercle. In

232
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


contrast, inguinal hernias originate superior and medial to the tubercle,
and can only be classified into „direct‟ or „indirect‟ at operation, when
their relation to the inferior epigastric artery can be observed. Spigelian
hernias originate at the linea semilunaris of the abdominal wall, and
obturator hernias are rare, and usually found in females.

The knee is a hinge joint, but it does move is three planes. Which
function of the knee allows increased flexion?
A. External rotation of tibia on femur in flexion
B. Posterior roll back of femur on tibia
C. The absence of posterior sloping of the proximal tibia
D. The presence of ACL
E. Tightness of the extensor mechanism.

ANSWER IS B
Just before full extension the lateral condyle of the femur stops moving
before the medial so that extension stops on the lateral side. As a result,
the femur medially rotates on the tibia. In full extension the anterior
cruciate ligament and posterior cruciate ligament are taut. To unlock the
knee the popliteus contracts and laterally rotates the femur on the tibia.
The knee joint can flex to about 135 degrees

During a pelvic lymphadenectomy, the common iliac vein is injured and
there is profuse bleeding. What is the best course of action?
Clamp the vessel to gain a better view and then ligate it
Occlude the bleeding point with digital pressure and consider direct
sutured repair with 5/0 polypropylene
Use diathermy at high coagulation current to stem the bleeding
Apply surgicell to the site and wait for bleeding to cease
Apply digital pressure to the vessel and suture the vessel with 2/0
polypropylene

ANSWER IS B
The use of digital pressure and careful sutured repair is the preferred
option.

An 62 year old man presents with dysphagia and on investigation is
found to have a stenosing tumour of the mid oesophagus with a single


233
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


metastasis in the right lobe of the liver (segment VI). What is the most
appropriate treatment?
Radical radiotherapy to the oesophagus and liver resection
Insertion of self expanding metallic stent
Liver resection and subsequent oesophageal resection
Oesophageal resection and subsequent liver resection
Combined oesophageal and liver resection if cardiopulmonary exercise
testing shows the patient is fit enough

ANSWER IS B
 Distant disease in patients with oesophageal cancer is a contra
indication to a resectional strategy and downstaging with chemotherapy
is not routinely undertaken in this age group as the results are poor. An
expanding stent will provide rapid and durable palliation.

During a radical neck dissection, division of which of the following fascial
layers will expose the ansa cervicalis?
Pretracheal fascia
Carotid sheath
Prevertebral fascia
Investing layer of fascia
Sibsons fascia

ANSWER IS A
The ansa cervicalis lies anterior to the carotid sheath. It may be exposed
by division of the pretracheal fascia at the posterolateral aspect of the
thyroid gland. The pre vertebral fascia lies more posteriorly and division
of the investing layer of fascia will not expose this nerve.

A 70-year-old lady presents with a painless neck lump. There is a mass
noted beneath the sternocleidomastoid muscle. There is a long history
and somewhat unkindly her husband remarked on her rather noticeable
halitosis. What is the most likely explanation?
Branchial cyst
Branchial fistula
Pharyngeal pouch
Thyroglossal cyst
Dental caries


234
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS C
Usual history of regurgitation of undigested food or coughing at night.
Associated with halitosis and throat infections.

A 29-year-old woman with a history of epilepsy has a witnessed fit and
fall with a blunt injury to the left side of her head with laceration. She
recovers rapidly from the fit to a GCS of 15 by the time of her arrival in
The Emergency Department and is awaiting a skull X-ray when she
starts to become drowsy and confused. She is moved to the
resuscitation area where her GCS declines rapidly to 7, requiring
intubation. Please select the most appropriate clinical description from
the list for this case.
A. Basal skull fracture
B. Extradural haematoma
C. Diffuse axonal injury
D. Subarachnoid haemorrhage
E. Subdural haematoma.

ANSWER IS B
These are located outside the dura but within the skull. They are most
commonly located in and associated with injuries of the temporal or
temporo-parietal region and often result from tearing of the middle
meningeal artery by a fracture. Because they are commonly not
associated with primary brain injury, there is classically a ‘lucid interval’
before a rapid decline in neurological status as a result of cerebral
compression from arterial bleeding. The so-called ‘talk and die’ scenario.



Meckel’s diverticulum - select the most appropriate hernia from the list.
A. Littré’s hernia
B. Maydl’s hernia
C. Pantaloon hernia
D. Richter’s hernia
E. Sliding hernia.

ANSWER IS A
In a sliding hernia the posterior wall of the hernial sac is formed by a
herniating viscus. This is usually sigmoid colon or bladder. During repair,
particular care is required not to injure the herniated viscus, which can
be seen when examining inside the opened sac.

235
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A



The superior cerebral veins drain into the: Single best answer question –
choose ONE true option only.
A. Cavernous sinus
B. Great cerebral vein
C. Inferior petrosal sinus
D. Superior petrosal sinus
E. Superior sagittal sinus

ANSWER IS E
The superior cerebral veins, eight to twelve in number, drain the
superior, lateral and medial surfaces of the cerebral hemispheres and
are mainly lodged in the sulci between the gyri, but some run across the
gyri. They open into the superior sagittal sinus. The anterior veins run
nearly at right angles to the sinus. The posterior and larger veins are
directed obliquely forward and open into the sinus in a direction more or
less opposed to the current of the blood contained within it.

A patient with a dislocated shoulder is thought to have an associated
axillary nerve injury. What would you expect to find on examination?
Single best answer question – choose ONE true option only.
A. No sensory loss and weakness of shoulder abduction
B. Sensory loss over the anterior aspect of the arm but no motor loss
C. Sensory loss over the anterior aspect and weakness of shoulder
abduction
D. Sensory loss over the lateral aspect and inability to initiate abduction
E. Sensory loss over the lateral aspect of the arm and weakness of
shoulder abduction

ANSWER IS E
The axillary nerve supplies the “regimental patch” area of skin over the
upper lateral aspect of the arm. Its motor component is to deltoid and to
teres minor. The motor deficit resulting from an axillary nerve injury is
weakness of these muscles. The most noticeable is abduction, since
flexion and extension are assisted by pectoralis major and latissimus
dorsi respectively. There is not complete loss of abduction as
supraspinatus will still be intact which mainly initiates abduction.

A 35-year-old woman presents with an acute episode of low back pain
which started on lifting a heavy object at home. Her pain is radiating

236
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


down one leg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Facet dislocation
B. Lumbar disc herniation
C. Multiple myeloma
D. Spinal stenosis
E. Spondylolisthesis.

ANSWER IS B
Lumbar disc prolapse is a condition occurring in fit young adults. It
occurs acutely when lifting heavy weights or whilst straining. The pain is
felt in the lower back, sometimes radiating to the buttock or down the
leg. 90% of patients will have improvement of symptoms within 3 months
with non-operative care. MRI is the modality of choice for diagnosis of
lumbar disc herniations.

A 26-year-old man is assaulted with a baseball bat. On examination, he
has multiple lacerations and bruises on his face. There is blood in the
left external auditory meatus and bilateral black eyes with a left
subconjunctival haematoma. Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) is 15. Please
select the most appropriate clinical description from the list for this case.
A. Basal skull fracture
B. Extradural haematoma
C. Intracerebral haemorrhage
D. Subarachnoid haemorrhage
E. Subdural haematoma.

ANSWER IS A
Skull fractures may be of the vault or base. Basal skull fractures usually
require computed tomography (CT) scanning (bone windows) for
identification. The clinical signs include, however, ‘racoon’ or ‘panda’
eyes (as in this case), retroauricular eccymosis (ie mastoid bruising =
Battle’s sign), subconjunctival haemorrhage and blood in the external
auditory meatus. Such fractures rarely require intervention but may be
associated with cerebrospinal fluid leaks from ear or nose, or with cranial
nerve palsies (as well as neurological injury). All should have 24-h
neurological observation. Antibiotics are not now administered.

An 85-year-old man is found at laparotomy to have a perforated gastric
ulcer high on the lesser curve. His past medical history includes COAD
(chronic obstructive airways disease) and angina. Select the most
appropriate option from the list below for the treatment of this patients.
237
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A. Total gastrectomy
B. Partial gastrectomy
C. Oesophago-gastrectomy
D. Excision of ulcer
E. Repeat endoscopy

ANSWER IS D
This patient’s age and significant co-morbidities suggest conservative
surgery (shorter anaesthetic, procedure time, lower burden of surgical
trauma) is indicated. Also the perforation is high on the lesser curve,
excision of the ulcer could be performed safely without injuring the
gastric vasculature.

A nursing student was given a lecture regarding intramuscular injection.
She wonders why injection has to be given at the upper outer quadrant
of the gluteus maximus. What nerve is likely to be injured if not done
so?
A. Femoral nerve
B. Saphenous nerve
C. Common fibular nerve
D. Obturator nerve
E. Sciatic nerve

ANSWER IS E
The sciatic nerve is susceptible to damage from an intramuscular
injection in the lower medial quadrant of the gluteus maximus muscle.
Such injury may affect both the common fibular and tibial nerves.

A 40-year-old man is involved in a road traffic accident and sustains
neck injury with C4/C5 dislocation. On examination he has loss of motor
function on one side and loss of pain and temperature sensation on the
contralateral side. Which spinal cord syndrome is associated with these
findings?
A. Anterior cord syndrome
B. Brown-Sequard syndrome
C. Central cord syndrome
D. Neurologic shock
E. Posterior cord syndrome.




238
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS B
Brown-Sequard syndrome is caused by complete cord hemitransection.
On examination patients have loss of motor power, proprioception and
vibration sensation on one side and contralateral loss of pain and
temperature sensation. This syndrome has the best prognosis of all
spinal cord injuries

A 45-year-old drug addict was admitted to the general medical ward with
septic shock. His right hip was flexed at 30° and there was reduced
sensation at the medial part of his thigh. In addition, the patient
experienced weakness in flexing his thigh at the hip and weakness in
knee extension. In view of this clinical scenario, what nerve is most likely
involved?
A. Femoral nerve
B. Saphenous nerve
C. Common fibular nerve
D. Obturator nerve
E. Sciatic nerve.

ANSWER IS A
The primary focus of this patient’s sepsis is likely to be an abscess of the
psoas major. The femoral nerve may be damaged in the abdomen as a
result. The femoral emerges from the lateral border of the psoas major in
the iliac fossa and passes into the anterior thigh posterior to the inguinal
ligament and lateral to the femoral artery. The femoral nerve innervates
muscles in the anterior compartment of the thigh and the skin of the
anterior and medial thigh.

A 31-year-old falls from a height sustaining multiple injuries, including
blunt injury to the head. She is deeply unconscious on arrival at The
Emergency Department (GCS 3) with normal pupils. A CT scan
demonstrates no focal abnormality but there is poor grey–white
differentiation and loss of sulcal pattern with effacement of both lateral
ventricles. The neurosurgeons place a monitoring bolt which
demonstrates an intracranial pressure of 50 mmHG. Please select the
most appropriate clinical description from the list for this case.
A. Basal skull fracture
B. Extradural haematoma
C. Diffuse axonal injury
D. Subarachnoid haemorrhage
E. Subdural haematoma.

239
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A



ANSWER IS C
This is the most severe type of diffuse brain injury (less severe are
defined as mild concussion and classic cerebral concussion). There is
no focal injury requiring emergency evacuation. The appearances are
those of cerebral oedema and raised intracranial pressure. Treatment
should be aimed at medically reducing intracranial pressure (< 25
mmHg) and increasing cerebral perfusion pressure and oxygenation.
The prognosis is very poor.

A 70-year-old woman attends The Emergency Department having fallen
at home. She is unclear of the events surrounding the fall, and as she
lives alone, no collateral history is available. She has vomited three
times since arrival in the department. Her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) is
currently 15. All other observations are normal. There is no evidence of
focal neurological deficit. Select the most appropriate plan of
management for this case.
A. Computed tomography (CT) scan
B. Admit for neuro-observations
C. Intracranial pressure monitoring
D. Craniotomy
E. Emergency burr hole

ANSWER IS A
Despite the apparently trivial mechanism of injury and the normal
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), this lady has two clinical features that
indicate risk of a clinically significant brain injury (age > 64 years and
more than one episode of vomiting). The Canadian Head CT Rule was
derived from a cohort of more than 3000 patients using multivariate
analysis of several risk factors, and has identified the following clinical
features that indicate that there is a clinically significant brain injury
requiring neurosurgical intervention:
1. GCS < 13 at any point since injury
2. GCS 13 or 14 with failure to regain GCS 15 within 2 h
3. suspected open or depressed skull fracture
4. any sign of basal skull fracture (Battle’s sign, haemotympanum etc)
5. more than one episode of vomiting
6. age > 64 years
7. post-traumatic seizure
8. coagulopathy (including anti-coagulant therapy)
9. focal neurological deficit.

240
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


CT scan should be performed within 1 h in all such patients. Two further
features in the absence of the above indicate a risk of clinically
significant brain injury that does not require neurosurgical intervention:
retrograde amnesia of > 30 min and dangerous mechanism of injury
(pedestrian hit by vehicle, fall from a height etc). CT scan in such
patients may be delayed for up to 8 h.

A 23-year-old man was tackled while playing rugby earlier on that day
and the force was directed at the outer and lower part of his left knee.
He noticed pain and paraesthesia in the dorsum of his left foot and found
it difficult to dorsiflex his left ankle. Which nerve has been injured?
A. Femoral nerve
B. Saphenous nerve
C. Common fibular nerve
D. Obturator nerve
E. Sciatic nerve

ANSWER IS C
The common fibular nerve is frequently injured as it passes around the
neck of the fibula. Classically, such patients experience foot drop, which
results from a loss of dorsiflexion at the ankle and a loss of eversion.
Patients have pain and paraesthesia in the lateral leg and dorsum of the
foot.

A 42-year-old woman complains of left-sided chest and abdominal pain,
worse on inspiration, 7 days postsplenectomy. Examination reveals a
temperature of 38.6°C, decreased air entry at the left lung base, dullness
to percussion and left upper quadrant tenderness. . Please select the
most appropriate diagnosis from the list.
A. Overwhelming post-splenectomy sepsis
B. Pancreatic fistula
C. Portal vein thrombosis
D. Splenosis
E. Subphrenic abscess

ANSWER IS E
Post-operative haematomas are common post-splenectomy. They may
collect in the subphrenic space, and infection can readily lead to a
subphrenic abscess. They may cause an associated pleural effusion as
in this case. Characteristically they present with swinging pyrexia,
sweats, rigors and left-sided pain on deep inspiration. Treatment is
241
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


usually by percutaneous drainage. Some operations have a good list of
specific complications that are beloved of examiners. Favoured are
probably thyroidectomy, splenectomy, laparoscopic cholecystectomy
and inguinal hernia repair.

A 31-year-old woman underwent primary varicose vein surgery of her
left lower limb 2 weeks ago. She came back to the follow up clinic
complaining of pain and paraesthesia in the skin of the medial aspect of
her left leg and foot. Which nerve has been injured during the
procedure?
A. Femoral nerve
B. Saphenous nerve
C. Common fibular nerve
D. Obturator nerve
E. Sciatic nerve.

 ANSWER IS B
The saphenous nerve enters the adductor canal but leaves the canal
without passing through the adductor hiatus. The saphenous nerve
courses with the great saphenous vein and innervates skin of the medial
side of the leg and foot. The nerve may be injured during surgical
removal of the great saphenous vein, or it may be lacerated as it pierces
the wall of the adductor canal.

Following a very difficult right thoracic outlet syndrome decompression in
a 35-year-old female there is some respiratory difficulty and there is
concern the right phrenic nerve may be injured. Which of these
descriptions most accurately describes the muscle relations of the
phrenic nerve? Select one answer only.
A. Anterior to scalenus anterior
B. Anterior to scalenusmedius
C. Anterior to trapezius
D. Posterior to scalenus anterior
E. Posterior to scalenusmedius.

ANSWER IS A
The phrenic nerve arises from C3, C4 and C5 deep to the scalenus
anterior and medius muscles, and runs on scalenus anterior, over the
anterior part of the dome of the pleura, to enter the mediastinum
posterior to the subclavian vein. Here the right phrenic nerve spirals
forward to lie on the SVC, right atrium and inferior vena cava (IVC), and
242
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


traverses the diaphragm via the caval orifice. The vagus nerve gives off
the recurrent laryngeal nerve

A 24-year-old gentleman presents to The Emergency Department with a
history of head injury while playing rugby. He was involved with a ‘clash
of heads’ with another player during a ‘ruck’. He remembers the events
surrounding the event well, and has no amnesia. Collateral history from
his friends confirms that there was no loss of consciousness. On
examination he is fully orientated, GCS is 15 and all other observations
are normal. There is no evidence of focal neurological deficit. Select the
most appropriate plan of management for this case.
A. Computed tomography (CT) scan
B. Admit for neuro-observations
C. Intracranial pressure monitoring
D. Craniotomy
E. Discharge and head injury instructions

ANSWER IS E
Patients with trivial head injury, and who are fully orientated, have no
history of loss of consciousness or amnesia, nor any other clinical risk
factors, as described above, have a negligible risk of a clinically
important brain injury and do not require imaging. The risk of
complications requiring hospital care is low enough to warrant discharge
to the care of a responsible adult with head injury instructions. All
patients with a head injury must receive such instructions before
discharge. Similarly, patients with a normal CT scan and no other social
or clinical risk factors may be discharged with head injury instructions.
A 13-year-old boy presents to The Emergency Department with a severe
headache and vomiting; for the past 2 to 3 days he has been off school
for presumed influenza. On examination he is flushed and has a
temperature of 39°C. There are no specific findings; however, on further
questioning his parents state that he had an emergency splenectomy
following a road traffic accident 1 year ago. Please select the most
appropriate diagnosis from the list.
A. Overwhelming post-splenectomy sepsis
B. Pancreatic fistula
C. Portal vein thrombosis
D. Splenosis
E. Subphrenic abscess




243
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS A
After splenectomy the ability of the spleen to destroy encapsulated
organisms is lost and infection can lead to the distinct clinical syndrome
of overwhelming post-splenectomy infection (OPSI). In children
splenectomised for trauma the incidence is about 1–2%, while for adults
it is about 0.5%. Long-term penicillins are of proven value in children, as
the maximal incidence of OPSI occurs within 2 years of surgery.
Prophylaxis with polyvalent vaccines is also recommended (usually to
pneumococcus, meningococcus and Haemophilus influenzae).

A 36-year-old unrestrained driver of a car is thrown against the
dashboard and sustains facial injuries with significant haematomatous
swelling over both maxillae and a flattening of the face. A skull X-ray and
subsequent computed tomography (CT) reconstruction demonstrate a
fracture extending from the nasal bridge below the nasofrontal suture
through the frontal processes of the maxilla, inferolaterally through the
lacrimal bones and inferior orbital floor and rim through the inferior
orbital foramen, and inferiorly through the anterior wall of the maxillary
sinus; it then travels under the zygoma, across the pterygomaxillary
fissure, and through the pterygoid plates. Please select the most
appropriate clinical description from the list for this case.
A. Basal skull fracture
B. Extradural haematoma
C. Le Fort I fracture
D. Le Fort II fracture
E. Le Fort III fracture

ANSWER IS D
Much of the understanding of patterns of fracture propagation in mid-
face trauma originates from the work of René Le Fort. In 1901, his work
on cadaver skulls that were subjected to blunt forces of various
magnitudes and directions demonstrated that predictable patterns of
fractures follow certain types of injuries. Three predominant types were
described which roughly correlate with increasing severity of injury,
especially in terms of associated brain injury. Fractures can be uni- or
bilateral. The classification is a slight simplification because, in practice,
combinations occur, however, it remains useful. Briefly (although best
seen pictorially): a Le Fort I (horizontal) fracture extends from the nasal
septum laterally through the maxilla just above the teeth and thence
backwards to the pterygoid region; a Le Fort II (pyramidal) fracture is as
described here; and a Le Fort III (transverse) fracture is an anatomically
complex injury which is often bilateral and which extends right across the
244
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


frontoethmoid regions, superior and lateral orbits to the zygomatic arch
laterally and back through the ethmoid to the sphenoid. It is a form of
craniofacial dysjunction.

A 38-year-old gentleman has been involved in a road traffic accident and
brought to The Emergency Department as a ‘trauma call’. The
ambulance staff inform you that he was a pedestrian hit by a car
travelling at approximately 40 mph. He has sustained a significant head
injury but the paramedic crew report that he was alert at the scene and
that his pupils were equal and reactive. Having completed the primary
survey, your examination reveals a GCS of 8, and a fixed dilated left
pupil. There is no evidence of hemiparesis. No other significant injuries
are apparent, and the patient is stable, and has a pulse rate of 50/min
and a blood pressure of 160/80 mmHg. You request an urgent CT scan,
but are informed that this will not be possible in your unit as the scanner
is undergoing repair. Select the most appropriate plan of management
for this case.
A. Computed tomography (CT) scan
B. Admit for neuro-observations
C. Intracranial pressure monitoring
D. Craniotomy
E. Endotracheal intubation

ANSWER IS E
This patient has several risk factors for significant brain injury requiring
urgent neurosurgical intervention. Clearly, he requires a CT scan, but
this is currently unavailable in the receiving Unit. A skull X-ray is unlikely
to provide sufficient information relating to the degree of brain injury
sustained, and therefore this patient should be transferred to a
Neurosurgical Unit where clinical and radiological assessment may be
performed. In addition, there is a clear indication to administer an
intravenous bolus of mannitol (1 g /kg) in this case, because there is a
history of deterioration in consciousness level and pupil changes,
secondary to rising intracranial pressure. The creation of an emergency
burr hole performed by a general surgeon is not generally recommended
or supported, and can only be justified in patients with rapidly expanding
intracranial haematomas that are imminently life-threatening, and when
definitive neurosurgical care is unavailable. Neither criteria are met, as
the diagnosis is not yet clear, and neurosurgical care is available.
However, before mannitol and transfer (which you might have been
tempted to choose), he will require intubation, ‘A’ being before ‘D’. The
primary aim of clinical and radiological assessment of patients with head
245
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


injury is to identify those patients with clinically important brain injury
and, most crucially, those with an intracranial haematoma requiring
urgent neurosurgical management. The vast majority of head injuries are
classified as ‘mild’ with a low-risk of intracranial haematoma. Previously,
skull X-ray has been heavily relied upon to triage patients with mild head
injury but the sensitivity of this investigation may be as low as 38%.
Therefore, it is currently only justified if computed tomography (CT) is not
available, or when non-accidental injury in children is suspected. By
contrast, CT scanning has a sensitivity and specificity approaching
100%, and so the Royal College of Surgeons Guidelines state that 24-h
CT is required in all centres receiving head-injured patients.

Extradural bleeding is associated with severe head injury and can result
in permanent brain damage if not recognised and managed immediately.
What is the main radiological feature of extradural haematoma?
A. Absence of a fracture on plain X rays
B. Biconvex looking bleeding on CT scan
C. Bleeding into the ventricles on CT
D. Bleeding that crosses suture lines
E. Crescentic shape of the bleed on CT.

ANSWER IS B
Extradural haematomas are biconvex; do not cross suture lines, as the
dura is very adherent to the cranium. They are usually associated with a
fracture, and are a result of damage to the anterior part of the middle
meningeal artery. Subdural haematoma are crescentic in shape. Both
extradural and subdural haematomas and any condition leading to
cerebral oedema could lead to a rise in ICP. In the early stages of head
injury, there is a non-linear relationship between an expanding
haematoma and elevation of ICP – a haematoma may expand without
any significant rise in pressure. Once this early compliance is lost, the
pressure will rise rapidly. This severely jeopardises cerebral perfusion:
cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) is equal to mean arterial blood
pressure minus ICP (normal CPP is approximately 70 mmHg and the
normal ICP in adults is 10–15 mmHg). The Monro–Kellie hypothesis: the
sum of intracranial volumes of blood, brain, CSF and other components
is constant, an increase in any one of these must be offset by a
corresponding decrease in another, or else the ICP will rise.

What is the mortality rate associated with ruptured abdominal aortic
aneurysms (AAA) presenting to hospital? Single best answer - select

246
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


one answer only.
A. 30%
B. 40%
C. 50%
D. 60%
E. 70%

 ANSWER IS C
The mortality rate of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA)
presenting to hospital is 50%. The overall mortality from ruptured AAA is
75%. Size is the most important risk factor for rupture, although rate of
expansion is also significant. The patient typically presents with a
hypotensive episode or collapse associated with severe central
abdominal pain radiating to the back and the flanks

What is the function of the middle nasal meatus?
A. It contains the bulla ethmoidalis of the middle ethmoidal air sinus
B. It drains the nasolacrimal duct
C. It drains the posterior ethmoidal air sinus
D. It drains the sphenoidal air cells
E. It is lined by olfactory epithelium containing the primary olfactory
neurons.

ANSWER IS A
The nasolacrimal duct drains into the inferior meatus; the sphenoidal air
sinus drains into the sphenoethmoidal recess; and the posterior
ethmoidal air sinus drains into the superior meatus. The middle meatus
contains the bulla ethmoidalis of the middle ethmoidal air sinus, which
drains through a hiatus in the bulla. Olfactory epithelium containing the
primary olfactory neurones lines the superior nasal recess (roof of the
nasal cavity) under cover of the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone.

A 79-year-old lady with a poor cardiac history and mild renal impairment
is admitted with haematemesis and melaena. A duodenal ulcer is found
at endoscopy and is found to be actively bleeding. The ulcer was
injected with adrenaline; however 12 hours later she was noted to have
rebled with further passage of fresh melaena. She remains
haemodynamically stable. Select the most appropriate option from the
list below for the treatment of this patients.
A. Total gastrectomy
B. Partial gastrectomy
247
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


C. Oesophago-gastrectomy
D. Excision of ulcer
E. Repeat endoscopy

ANSWER IS E
New NICE guidelines (June 2012) suggest that in the case of post-
endoscopic rebleeding, patients should be offered repeat endoscopy. If
this fails to achieve haemostasis then surgery should be considered. If
the re-bleeding patient is hameodynamically unstable then interventional
radiological procedures should be considered (if available). In this case,
the patient has significant comorbidities and so the minimum safe
procedure (in this case underrunning) should be performed.

A fit 59-year-old man with a known benign gastric ulcer on the greater
curvature of the stomach presents with melaena. He has completed an
8-week course of omeprazole. He has required a transfusion of 6 units
of blood and repeat endoscopy shows signs of an active bleed. Select
the most appropriate option from the list below for the treatment of this
patients.
A. Total gastrectomy
B. Partial gastrectomy
C. Oesophago-gastrectomy
D. Excision of ulcer
E. Repeat endoscopy

ANSWER IS B
This patient’s ulcer is known to be benign. Despite best medical therapy
his ulcer has not healed and so it should be excised. The available
evidence is not conclusive, but suggests that partial gastrectomy may
have lower morbidity and mortality rates than ulcer excision.

A 78-year-old lady has been admitted for a mastectomy and sentinel
node procedure for a large area of screen detected ductal carcinoma in
situ. You have been asked to mark out the borders of the breast. Which
of the following statements is accurate regarding the mammary gland?
Single best answer – Select one answer only.
A. Contains 15 main lactiferous ducts that drain separately at the nipple
B. Is mainly supplied by the lateral thoracic artery and internal mammary
artery
C. In this age group is best visualised by a combination of crainiocaudal
and true mediolateral mammograms
248
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


D. Is a modified sebaceous gland
E. Predominantly drains to the internal thoracic nodes.

ANSWER IS B
The breast lies on the pectoralis major, serratus anterior and external
oblique muscles. It is a modified apocrine sweat gland. The mammary
gland is mainly supplied by the lateral thoracic artery, by branches that
curl around the border of pectoralis major. In addition, there is a blood
supply from the internal thoracic artery, intercostal and thoracoacromial
arteries.
The main lymphatic drainage is to the axillary and infraclavicular nodes
in 75% of cases whereas the majority of the medial breast drains to
nodes which lie along the internal thoracic artery. The gland contains
approximately 15-20 main ducts that open separately on the summit of
the nipple. Screening mammograms involve craniocaudal and
mediolateral oblique views which are double read by consultant
radiologists.

A 35-year-old male receives a renal transplant from an unrelated donor
for dialysis-dependent renal disease. The transplanted organ is placed in
the right iliac fossa. What type of transplant is this? Select one answer
only.
A. Autograft
B. Isograft
C. Heterotopic graft
D. Orthotopic graft
E. Xenograft.

ANSWER IS C
Important terms to understand in transplant surgery are as follows: 1.
Autograft - transplant of tissue from one location to another in the same
individual 2. Isograft - transplant of tissue between genetically identical
individuals e.g. identical twins 3. Allograft - transplantation of an organ or
tissue between genetically different individuals from the same species 4.
Xenograft - transplantation of organs between different species 5.
Orthotopic graft - transplantation of a donor organ to the same
anatomical site in a recipient 6. Heterotopic graft - transplantation of a
donor organ to a different anatomical site than that of the existing
kidneys in a recipient.



249
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


A 38-year-old woman with an extensive malignant growth in the anterior
wall of the vagina is most likely to have involvement of which adjacent
structure? Single best answer question – choose ONE true option only.
A. Anal canal
B. Fundus of the bladder
C. Perineal body
D. Rectum
E. Rectovesical fascia.

ANSWER IS B
The anterior surface of the vagina is related to the fundus of the bladder
and the urethra. A growth in the anterior wall is therefore most likely to
involve the fundus of the urinary bladder and/or the urethra. The
posterior surface is separated from the rectum by the rectouterine pouch
in its upper quarter and by the rectovesical fascia in its middle two
quarters, while the lower quarter is separated from the anal canal by the
perineal body.
Its sides are enclosed between the levatores ani muscles. As the
terminal portions of the ureters pass forward and medially to reach the
fundus of the bladder, they run close to the lateral fornices of the vagina
and as they enter the bladder they are slightly anterior to the anterior
fornix.

A 19-year-old accidentally cuts her lateral forearm on a bread knife. On
surgical exploration she has divided her cephalic vein. Which one of the
following is correct?
A. Drains into the subclavian vein
B. Forms in the anatomical snuff box
C. Has a tributary called the basilic vein
D. Is medial to the distal biceps tendon
E. Runs between deltoid and pectoralis minor

ANSWER IS B
The cephalic vein forms in the anatomical snuffbox, it runs up the lateral
forearm and at the antecubital fossa, it lies lateral to the distal tendon of
biceps. It passes through the upper arm lying lateral to biceps before
running through the deltopectoral groove (deltoid and pectoralis major)
and then joining the axillary vein. The basilic vein runs up the medial
border of the upper limb, becoming the axillary vein at the lower border
of teres major.


250
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


A 79-year-old male presents with difficulty in passing urine and is
diagnosed with prostatic adenocarcinoma. From which histological
structure is his disease most likely to have originated? Single best
answer - select one answer only.
A. Anterior fibromuscular zone
B. Central zone
C. Peripheral zone
D. Prostatic urethra
E. Transitional zone

ANSWER IS C
The peripheral zone of the prostate contains around 75% of all the
glandular tissue. Accordingly, 80% of all prostate cancers originate here.
10-20% of cancers originate within the transitional zone, and 2.5% within
the central zone. The anterior fibromuscular zone contains no glandular
tissue.

When making an incision for an inguinal hernia repair, the vessels which
may be encountered beneath Camper‟s fascia are: Single best answer
question – choose ONE true option only.
A. The accessory obturator vein
B. The gonadal vein
C. The superficial inferior epigastric artery and vein
D. The superficial circumflex iliac artery and vein
E. None of the above.

ANSWER IS C
The superficial fascia just superior to the inguinal ligament can be
divided into two layers: i. a superficial fatty layer (Camper‟s fascia) and
ii. a membranous deep layer (Scarpa‟s fascia). The superficial vessels
and nerves are located between these two layers of superficial fascia.
One should be mindful of the superficial inferior epigastric vessels when
cutting through Camper‟s as failure to do so can lead to troublesome
bleeding.

A 25-year-old man from Uganda presents with a high anal fistula. He is a
non-smoker who has had a chronic cough for 3 months and has noticed
weight loss of 2 stone. What is the most likely associated condition
leading to this high anal fistula? Select one answer only.
A. Carcinoma
B. Crohn’s disease
251
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


C. Diverticular disease
D. Tuberculosis
E. Ulcerative colitis.

ANSWER IS D
High fistulae are uncommon but may be due to carcinoma, diverticular
disease, tuberculosis, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, trauma or
radiotherapy. The most likely condition that this patient is suffering from
is tuberculosis. TB is endemic in Uganda, and often presents with
pulmonary symptoms, and weight loss.

A 57-year-old male received a renal transplant from an unrelated donor
15 years earlier and has had no rejection problems post-operative. He is
noted by his dentist during a routine check-up to have gingival
hypertrophy. Which of his medications is likely to be causing this? Select
one answer only.
A. Azathioprine
B. Cyclosporin
C. Mycophenolatemofetil
D. Prednisolone
E. Rituximab.

ANSWER IS B
All immunosuppressive medications carry important side effects, it is
important to be aware of these. Azathioprine can cause
myelosuppression and acute pancreatitis. Steroids such as prednisolone
carry numerous side effects such as Cushing‟s syndrome. Cyclosporin
can cause gingival hypertrophy in addition to nephrotoxicity,
hepatotoxicity and neurotoxicity. Mycophenolatemofetil can also cause
bone marrow suppression and patients require regular full blood counts
upon starting it. Rituximab is a monoclonal anitibody that can also be
used for lymphomas. Its can cause cardiac problems such as
exacerbation of angina, heart failure and arrhythmias.

A 64-year-old male who underwent a liver transplant 6 years earlier
presents to his GP with a lesion on his lower lip that bleeds
intermittently. On examination it is a small ulcerated lesion with raised
edges. He reports it has been present for 4 months and is not healing.
What is the most likely nature of this lesion? Select one answer only.
A. Candida albicans
B. Kaposi sarcoma
252
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


C. Melanoma
D. Squamous cell carcinoma
E. Gingival hypertrophy.

ANSWER IS D
Long term immunosuppression for successful organ transplantation
carries a number of important side effects such as malignant disease in
particular squamous cell carcinoma. This has a number of different
appearances, but is can be a non-healing ulcer often with slightly
everted edges. Transplant patients are often followed up long term to
screen for the development of skin cancers secondary to
immunosuppression.

You see a 55-year-old man with end-stage renal failure. He says his
father also had problems with his kidneys. On examination he has
bilateral balottable masses in his flanks. Select the most likely diagnosis.
A. Chronic glomerulonephritis
B. Diabetes mellitus
C. Hypertensive nephrosclerosis
D. Chronic interstitial nephritis
E. Polycystic kidney disease.

 ANSWER IS E
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is one of the
most common inherited disorders in humans. It is the most frequent
genetic cause of renal failure in adults.

You are examining a patient in clinic who is referred by the GP with a
swelling in the neck. The posterior triangle of the neck contains the:
A. Facial nerve
B. Great auricular nerve
C. Omohyoid muscle
D. Roots of the brachial plexus
E. Vertebral artery.

ANSWER IS C
The great auricular nerve turns upwards round the lateral border of the
sternocleidomastoid muscle outside the triangle. The posterior belly of
the omohyoid muscle and its intermediate tendon pass diagonally
through the triangle (they are palpable, often confused with both the

253
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


upper trunk of the brachial plexus and the suprascapular nerve), and the
clavicular (intermediate) and acromial (lateral) branches of the
supraclavicular nerves course through the roof.
Lying medially, outside the triangle, are the roots of the brachial plexus,
sandwiched between the scalenus anterior and medius muscles. The
vertebral artery lies within the pyramidal space inferiorly, before
ascending through the foramen transversarium of the C1–C6 vertebrae.
Other components of the posterior triangle include the semispinalis
capitis, splenius capitis, levator scapulae and scalenus medius muscles
and the spinal accessory nerve

A 21-year-old man is brought into A&E unresponsive after being stabbed
in the chest. On examination the knife has been left in place and is
entering through the 4th intercostal space on the left of the sternum. He
has a heart rate of 140 and his BP is 70/30. He is noted to have a
central trachea, distended neck veins. He has normal breath sounds
bilaterally, but muffled heart sounds. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Select one answer only.
A. Aortic dissection
B. Cardiac tamponade
C. Haemothorax
D. Pneumothorax
E. Tension pneumothorax

ANSWER IS B
ECG is useful to detect dysrhythmias and pulseless electrical activity
(PEA). There is no indication for routine exploratory thoracotomy within 1
hour. An urgent exploratory thoracotomy should be performed if 1500 ml
of blood is drained immediately from the chest drain or 200 ml/h for 2–4
hours. A normal appearance of the cardiac shadow on CXR is
insufficient to exclude a tamponade.
Echocardiography and computed tomography (CT) are more sensitive
methods. Neck veins should be assessed for distension. Beck‟s triad for
cardiac tamponade consists of muffled heart sounds, hypotension and
distended neck veins. Tension pneumothorax is a clinical diagnosis
requiring immediate management.
Aortic dissection classically causes a tearing chest pain radiating
through to the back. On examination, the patient can have a variety of
symptoms depending on which part of the aorta (and therefore who
branches) are affected. If the common carotid artery is affected they may
have a neurological signs, there may be signs in the upper limb if the
subclavian arteries are affected.
254
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


If the dissection involves the abdominal aorta, the patient may have
abdominal signs or oliguria/ anuria if the renal arteries are affected.
Classically, there may be a difference in blood pressure between the
arms due to subclavian artery involvement on one side.
A haemothorax would cause chest signs on examination- reduced or
absent air/entry and dullness to percussion, this helps to differentiate it
from a pneumothorax in which air entry may also be reduced or absent,
but percussion is hyper-resonant. In tension pneumothorax a valve like
mechanism allows the accumulation of air in the pleural space which
causes medistinal displacement- thus affecting venous return to the
heart and therefore cardiac output.
It will lead to severe shortness of breath, tracheal deviation, dilated neck
veins and ultimately cardiac arrest. The diagnosis is clinical, and
management should not be delayed for a chest X ray.

The knee is a hinge joint, but it does move is three planes. Which
function of the knee allows increased flexion?
A. External rotation of tibia on femur in flexion
B. Posterior roll back of femur on tibia
C. The absence of posterior sloping of the proximal tibia
D. The presence of ACL
E. Tightness of the extensor mechanism.

ANSWER IS B
Just before full extension the lateral condyle of the femur stops moving
before the medial so that extension stops on the lateral side. As a result,
the femur medially rotates on the tibia. In full extension the anterior
cruciate ligament and posterior cruciate ligament are taut. To unlock the
knee the popliteus contracts and laterally rotates the femur on the tibia.
The knee joint can flex to about 135 degrees.

A 2-year-old boy presents with a large mass in the left flank and
proceeds to laparotomy with excision of Wilms‟ tumour. During the
procedure, the lienorenal ligament is divided. Which vessels are carried
by this ligament?
A. Left colic
B. Left gastric
C. Pancreaticoduodenal
D. Renal
E. Splenic


255
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS E
The lienorenal ligament connects the hilum of the spleen to the left
kidney. The splenic artery and vein are carried within it, as is the
pancreatic tail. Wilms‟ tumour (nephroblastoma) is the commonest type
of renal tumour of childhood, representing 20% of all childhood
malignancies.

A 53-year-old woman has fallen onto her outstretched right hand, result-
ing in an undisplaced fracture of the distal radius and ulna. She was
previously fit and well. She wants to know how long it will take for the
fracture to heal.
How long would you expect this fracture to take to heal?
1 week
3 weeks
6 weeks
12 weeks
16 weeks

ANSWER IS C – 6 weeks. As a general rule, upper limb fractures in
adults take 6–8 weeks to heal, while lower limb fractures take 12–16
weeks. These numbers are halved in children. Healing times are
affected by fracture type and site, quality of local blood supply, amount
of soft tissue interposition and amount of movement at the site of injury.
Patient factors, such as anaemia, chronic illness and steroid use, will
also have a bearing on healing.

A 3-year-old boy is brought to the GP practice by his mother. He has
been complaining intermittently about abdominal pain. His mother feels
that his abdomen is distended. On examination, there is a large mass on
the left side of the abdomen which does not cross the midline.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hepatoblastoma
Lipoma
Nephroblastoma
Neuroblastoma
Polycystic kidney



256
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


 ANSWER IS C – Nephroblastoma. A nephroblastoma, also known as
Wilms tumour, is formed by the embryonic precursor to renal cells and
can arise anywhere in the kidney. The incidence is 1 in 10,000 and it
accounts for up to 20% of childhood malignancies. The typical age of
presentation is 2–3 years, with boys being more commonly affected.
Around 10% of cases of Wilms tumour are bilateral. It is associated with
a deletion on the short arm of chromosome 11 and may be linked with
other congenital anomalies such as aniridia (incomplete formation of the
iris) and polycystic kidney disease. Presentation is usually vague
(features include weight loss, anorexia and fever) and the abdominal
mass is often found incidentally on examination. Diagnosis can be
confirmed on ultrasound and CT. Nephrectomy and radiotherapy is the
mainstay of treatment of localized disease, with chemotherapy in
advanced disease. Nephroblastomas are pale grey with areas of
haemorrhage on cross-section.

A 57-year- old man presents with a progressive deformity of his right
hand which has been present for over a year. On examination, he has
thicken-ing over the palm with fixed contracture of the ring and little
finger. He tells you that the deformity is limiting his day-to-day work as a
computer programmer.
Which of the following management options would be recommended?
Conservative management
Physiotherapy
Splinting
Steroid injections
Surgery

ANSWER IS E – Surgery. This patient has presented with a Dupuytren
contracture, a flexion contracture of the hand caused by thickening of
the connective tissue of the palmar aponeurosis. It most commonly
affects the ring and little fingers, although sometimes there may be
involvement of the other digits. The cause of Dupuytren’s is largely
unknown but it occurs in around 5% of the population. It typically
presents after the age of 40 with men affected more than women. It has
an association with manual labour, anti-epileptic medications
(phenobarbitone, phenytoin), alcoholic liver disease, diabetes and
hypothyroidism. Other areas of the body may also be affected such as
the soles of the feet (Ledderhose disease) and the penis (Peyronie
disease). In the early stages management is largely conservative but if

257
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


function is affected then surgery is indicated. Surgery involves excising
the thickened aponeurosis and would be followed by a period of splinting
and physiotherapy to restore hand function. Re-thickening can occur so
surgery may need to be repeated.



Tented T waves on electrocardiograms are thought to reflect
hyperkalae-mia. A new proposed definition of tented T waves is ‘a T
wave that is taller than 2 large squares’. A study looking at the feasibility
of this definition found 1000 ECGs: 200 with tented T waves (according
to the proposed definitions) and 800 without. The study found that of the
200 people with ECGs with tented T waves, 100 had hyperkalaemia. Of
the 800 people without tented T waves, a further 100 had
hyperkalaemia.
What is the specificity of this definition of tented T waves with relation to
hyperkalaemia?
12.5%
25.0%
50.0%
87.5%
95.0%

ANSWER IS D – 87.5%. The specificity is the ability of an investigation
to detect a truly negative test result. Specificity = number of true
negatives/(number of true negatives + number of false positives) × 100
In this case, 700 people who did not have tented T waves also did not
have hyperkalaemia, i.e. of the 800 ‘negative’ results, 700 were true
negatives. Similarly, only 100 of the 200 people with ‘tented T waves’
truly had hyperkalaemia; in other words there were 100 true positives
and 100 false positives. Thus, Specificity = 700/(700 + 100) × 100 = 7/8
× 100 = 87.5%.

A 72 year old man undergoes a distal gastrectomy for carcinoma of the
stomach. He presents with jaundice approximately 8 months post
operatively. Ultrasound of the liver and bile ducts shows no focal liver
lesion and normal calibre common bile duct with intra hepatic duct
dilatation. What is the most likely explanation?
Peri hilar lymphadenopathy
Fitz- Hugh Curtis syndrome

258
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Gilberts syndrome
Mirizzi syndrome
Gallstones
ANSWER IS A
Unfortunately, metastatic disease is the most likely event. Peri hilar
lymphadenopathy would be a common culprit.

A 46-year- old woman attends her general practice complaining of low
mood and tiredness. She has had this for a few months and has had to
take time off work. On further questioning she admits to being consti-
pated and to having gained 2 stone in weight over the previous month.
On examination, no abnormality is apparent in the neck and no
lymphade-nopathy is palpable.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Haemorrhage into a cyst
Hashimoto thyroiditis
Medullary carcinoma
Myxoedema coma
Primary myxoedema

ANSWER IS E – Primary myxoedema. The woman in this question
presents with some classic features of an underactive thyroid. This,
along with the lack of goitre, makes primary myxoedema the best
answer. Primary myxoedema is also known as spontaneous atrophic
hypothyroidism. It is characterized by an idiopathic reduction in the
production of thyroid hormones. Features of hypothyroidism include a
hoarse voice, constipation, feeling cold, weight gain, low mood, lethargy,
coarse hair and dysmenorrhoea. The diagnosis of primary
hypothyroidism is made by demonstrating a low T4 (thyroxine) despite a
high TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone). Hypothyroidism is treated with
daily thyroxine, which is taken for life. Older patients with undiagnosed
hypothyroidism, or those who do not take their medications, can present
with features of severe hypothyroidism or a myxoedema coma. These
include impaired consciousness, hypothermia, bradycardia and
hypoglycaemia. Patients with a myxoedema coma should be transferred
to intensive care for fluids, gentle re-warming and intravenous thyroid
hormones. The mortality is 50%.
A 64-year-old woman presents to the emergency department with an
acutely painful left leg. She is complaining that it feels ‘cold and numb’.
259
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


There is no history of trauma and she has never had similar symptoms
in the past.
Which of the following would you not expect to be found on
examination?
A tender, pulsatile, expansile mass in the abdomen
Absent left leg pulses
ECG showing an irregular rhythm
Pan-systolic murmur on auscultation
Wet gangrene

ANSWER IS E – Wet gangrene. This woman has presented with acute
limb ischaemia, characterized by the six Ps: acute pain, pallor,
paraesthesia, pulseless, paralysis, perishing coldness. This is a surgical
emergency as irreversible damage can occur within 6 hours and there is
loss of the limb in up to 40% of cases. Ischaemia can be caused by
thrombus on pre-existing atherosclerotic areas (60%), emboli (30%),
trauma, thrombosed aneurysm, dissecting aneurysm, prothrombotic
states and intraarterial drug administration. Both an irregular cardiac
rhythm and valvular dysfunction (congenital,rheumatic fever, post
myocardial infarction) can lead to the formation of mural thrombus and
subsequent emboli. Wet gangrene occurs when there is infection within
an area of dry gangrene, a feature of chronic ischaemia.



A 34-year-old man is brought to the emergency department. Three days
ago he suffered an insect bite to the upper leg; he is now complaining of
severe pain in the thigh, fever and vomiting. On examination of the thigh,
there is marked, spreading erythema with areas of blistering and skin
necrosis.
Which of the following is the best course of management?
Intravenous antibiotics alone
Intravenous antibiotics and surgical debridement
Intravenous steroids
Oral antibiotics
E. Skin biopsy

ANSWER IS B – Intravenous antibiotics and surgical debridement. This
patient has necrotizing fasciitis, a rare but life-threatening soft tissue
260
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


infection which spreads rapidly across fascial planes leading to oedema,
vascular occlusion and tissue necrosis. The most common organisms
responsible are the group A beta haemolytic streptococci, although other
bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus, E. coli) may be isolated and some
cases are polymicrobial in origin. Necrotizing fasciitis can occur after
surgery or minor trauma, or the cause may be unknown. Risk factors
include immunosuppression and diabetes mellitus. These cases present
acutely with severe pain, systemic upset and progressive tissue
destruction. Intravenous antibiotics, together with debridement of
necrotic tissue, are required as soon as possible to prevent septicaemia,
amputation and death. Mortality is around 25%. Polymicrobial
necrotizing fasciitis of the scrotum, penis or perianal area is known as
Fournier’s gangrene.

A 64-year-old man presents to the GP practice with a 2-month history of
intermittent episodes of lower back pain radiating to both legs on walk-
ing. His symptoms are relieved by sitting or leaning forward. He has no
back pain at rest. Examination is unremarkable.
Which of the following is the most likely cause of his symptoms?
Intermittent claudication
Lumbar spondylosis
Lumbar spondylolisthesis
Spinal stenosis
Spinal tumour

ANSWER IS D – Spinal stenosis. Chronic back pain is the leading cause
for time off work and causes significant disability. Causes of pain include
trauma, degeneration, infection and malignancy. Spinal stenosis is the
term given to narrowing of the spinal canal, most commonly caused by
osteoarthritis. It may be thought of as a spinal claudication, as symptoms
are caused by a lack of blood supply to the cauda equina in the
restricted spinal canal. Symptoms are typically relieved by sitting or
bending forwards, as these actions widen the spinal canal and help
improve the circulation. Diagnosis is best made on MRI. Spondylosis is
the most common cause of back pain and is attributable to osteoarthritic
degenerative changes leading to loss of height of the vertebrae and
displacement of the posterior facet joints. The lumbar spine is usually
affected in the L5/S1 and the L4/L5 regions. Pain is characteristically
aching in nature and worse in the mornings and following activity.
Spondylolisthesis is the spontaneous displacement of a vertebral body

261
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


upon the one below. It commonly occurs at the L5/S1 region then at the
L4/L5 region. Displacement is usually anterior. Back pain is usually
worse while standing. A ‘step’ deformity may be felt on palpating down
the spine. Ankylosing spondylitis is a seronegative inflammatory
degenerative condition which largely affects the spine and sacroiliac
joints. It is most commonly found in Caucasian males and associated
with HLAB27. Progressive fusion of the spine causes a ‘bamboo spine’
appearance on X-ray. Spinal tumours in adults are mostly metastatic in
origin (e.g. from breast, lung and prostate). Pain is usually unremitting
and associated with systemic features such as weight loss and night
sweats.

A 45 -year-old male coach driver presents to the emergency department
with a 3-day history of a swollen left leg and some shortness of breath.
On examination, the left calf is swollen and tender. The pedal pulses are
palpable and the foot is warm.
What would be the most appropriate initial management?
Elevation, rest and NSAIDs
Emergency surgery
Intravenous heparin
Subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin
Warfarin

ANSWER IS D – Subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin This man
has developed a deep vein thrombosis, and may have secondary
pulmonary embolism. Management can either be with intravenous
heparin or subcutaneous low molecular weight heparins (LMWHs).
Heparin requires a loading dose followed by a continuous infusion, and
the dose of the drug is modified according to daily measurements of
activated partial thromboplastin time (APTI). LMWHs are much easier to
administer (by once-daily injection) and do not require monitoring. For
this reason LMWH is the first-line treatment for deep vein thrombosis
andpulmonary embolism. Heparin is reserved for patients with severe,
lifethreatening thromboembolism. Treatment with LMWHs or heparin is
continued until warfarin therapy has been commenced effectively.

56-year-old man presents to the emergency department with a 3-hour
history of severe abdominal pain and vomiting. On examination, the


262
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


abdomen is rigid. A CT scan confirms free air in the peritoneum and a
perforation of a sigmoid diverticulum.
What is the most appropriate operation?
Abdominoperineal resection
Extended right hemicolectomy
Hartmann procedure
Left hemicolectomy
Right hemicolectomy

ANSWER IS C – Hartmann procedure. This man has developed
peritonitis following perforation of a diverticulum. He will require an
appropriate resection with a delayed anastomosis, known as Hartmann
procedure. Hartmann procedure involves resection of the rectosigmoid
colon with closure of the rectal stump and formation of a colostomy. This
operation avoids the potential complications of forming an anastomosis
under sub-optimal emergency conditions, when there is a greater risk of
post-operative anastomosis breakdown. The colostomy can then be
reversed at a later date.

A 72-year- old man who has no past medical history of note has been
referred to you by his GP. His GP found an incidental non-tender
expans-ile mass in his abdomen. An ultrasound scan demonstrates an
abdominal aortic aneurysm that is 5 cm in diameter.
What is the best course of management?
Admit for emergency repair
Commence on antihypertensives and advise to see GP if he develops
abdominal pain
Organize an elective repair
Repeat an ultrasound scan in 3 months
Repeat an ultrasound scan in 1 year

ANSWER IS D – Repeat an ultrasound scan in 3 months. The normal
size of the abdominal aorta is 2 cm. A dilatation of the abdominal aorta
above 3 cm is defined as an abdominal aortic aneurysm. Abdominal
aortic aneurysms (AAA) are commoner in men, affecting 5% of those
aged over 65 years. Other risk factors are smoking, hypertension,
hypercholesterolaemia and a family history. The majority of AAAs (95%)
are below the renal arteries (infrarenal) and 30% extend to involve the

263
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


iliac arteries below. The risk of rupture of AAAs is directly proportional to
the diameter. The risk of rupture of those AAAs with a diameter of less
than 4 cm is low and so they can be followed up with annual ultrasound
scans. AAAs with a diameter between 4.0 and 5.5 cm need to be
followed up every 3 months. If the diameter is greater than 5.5 cm
elective intervention is required unless the aneurysm is rapidly
expanding (>1 cm/ year), tender or symptomatic, in which case early
repair is indicated. The mortality of elective repair of AAA is 5% as
compared to a mortality of up to 50% in emergency cases, highlighting
the importance of close monitoring and follow-up of even incidental
AAAs.

59-year-old woman has recently had a resection of a sigmoid
adenocarcinoma. The pathology report said that the tumour invaded
through the bowel wall but there was no evidence of lymph node
involvement.
Which of the following best describes this stage of tumour?
Dukes A
Dukes B
Dukes C1
Dukes C2
Dukes D

ANSWER IS B – Dukes B. The Dukes system of grading colorectal
cancer was originally divided into stages A, B and C. The modified
Dukes system added a ‘D stage’, which describes the presence of
distant metastases. Dukes A → confined to the bowel wall Dukes B →
invade through the bowel wall but there is no lymph node involvement
Dukes C → → → invade the bowel wall and involve lymph nodes C1 =
apical node not involved C2 = apical node involved Dukes D → distal
metastases present.

A new blood test has been produced to help diagnose suspected
tumours of the membranous urethra. Of a study sample of 100 patients,
20 are known to have cancer of the membranous urethra. The blood test
suggested that 30 people had the tumour, but of these only 15 were true
positives. What is the positive predictive value of this test?
25%
50%

264
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


75%
90%
100%

ANSWER IS B – 50%. The positive predictive value (PPV) describes the
probability that a condition can be confirmed given a positive test result.
PPV = (number of true positives/total number of positives) × 100 Thus,
PPV = (15/30) × 100 = 50%.


A 17-year-old boy presents with severe left shoulder pain following a
tackle during a rugby match. On examination, the contour of the left
shoulder is flattened, and the humeral head is palpable just under the
clavicle. There is also sensory loss at the upper lateral aspect of the
arm.
Which nerve has most likely been affected?
Accessory nerve
Axillary nerve
Long thoracic nerve
Median nerve
Radial nerve
ANSWER IS B – Axillary nerve. This boy presents with an anterior
shoulder dislocation. The axillary nerve wraps around the surgical neck
of the humerus and is damaged in 5–10% of anterior dislocations. It can
also be affected in fractures of the humeral neck. The axillary nerve
supplies the deltoid muscle and gives rise to the lateral cutaneous nerve
of the arm (which supplies sensation to the upper, outer arm). Axillary
nerve lesions result in anaesthesia in the upper, outer arm (the
‘regimental badge patch’ area) and paralysis of the deltoid muscle,
resulting in limited arm abduction. While the arm cannot be abducted, if
it is passively lifted above 90°, the arm can be held in abduction due to
the action of supraspinatus. The spinal root of the accessory nerve
(cranial nerve XI) supplies the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid
muscles. It can be damaged during dissections of the neck. Features of
accessory nerve palsy include weakness of shoulder shrugging and the
inability to turn the head against a force applied by the examiner. The
long thoracic nerve of Bell supplies serratus anterior, a muscle which
helps stabilize the scapula. This nerve can be damaged during breast
and axillary surgery, radiotherapy and axillary trauma. Lesions of the
265
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


long thoracic nerve result in winging of the scapula, where the scapula
becomes prominent on pushing the arms against resistance.


A 24-year- old woman with no past medical history of note comes to see
you at the GP practice complaining of a 2-day history of urinary fre-
quency together with a stinging sensation on passing urine. She is sys-
temically well.Which of the following organisms is most likely to have
caused her symptoms?
Candida albicans
Escherichia coli
Herpes simplex
Proteus mirabilis
Pseudomonas aeruginosa


ANSWER IS B – Escherichia coli. Cystitis usually presents with dysuria,
frequency of urine, suprapubic discomfort and fever. Cystitis is much
more common in women due to their shorter urethra. Escherichia coli,
usually found in the bowel, is the most common pathogen responsible
for uncomplicated cystitis in the UK (75%). Cystitis can be confirmed by
the presence of leucocytes, nitrites and blood in the urine. A mid stream
urine (MSU) sample should be sent to microbiology for microscopy,
culture and sensitivity. A positive culture is when more than 105 of a
single organism are grown per millilitre of urine. The growth of mixed
bacterial species usually indicates contamination of the sample.
Antibiotic treatment should be guided by local patterns of bacterial
resistance and MSU sensitivity results. Uncomplicated cystitis is usually
treated with a 3–5-day course of trimethoprim. Other antibiotics that are
used to treat cystitis include amoxicillin, ciprofloxacin, cefradine and
nitrofurantoin. Patients who are susceptible to recurrent urinary tract
infection can be prescribed prophylactic antibiotics (e.g. 100 mg of
trimethoprim once nightly). Patients should be advised to drink lots of
fluids and avoid dehydration. UTIs in men and children require further
investigation to rule out an underlying structural problem.


A 4-year-old girl is referred to the urology clinic by the GP as she has
been having recurrent urinary tract infections. Examination of the child is
unremarkable.

266
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Which of the following is most likely to be causing the problem?
Hydronephrosis
Pelvic kidney
Posterior urethral valve
Renal agenesis
Vesica-ureteric reflux


ANSWER IS E – Vesica-ureteric reflux. Vesica-ureteric reflux is caused
by an abnormal insertion of a ureter into the bladder resulting in the
failure of the valves between the two. This results in the reflux of urine
back up into the ureter on contraction of the bladder. Vesicaureteric
reflux occurs in around 1 in 100 children and is more common in girls. If
left untreated, it can result in hypertension and kidney failure. The
degree of reflux varies from mild to severe (graded 1–5), where large
amounts of urine are refluxing to the kidneys. Vesica-ureteric reflux can
be bilateral. Treatment is with prophylactic antibiotics to prevent urinary
tract infections and with early, aggressive treatment if infections do
develop. If recurrent UTIs occur despite treatment, or reflux is present
after the age of 5, then surgical re-implantation of the ureters is required.
A pelvic kidney results from incomplete migration of the kidneys and is
rarely symptomatic. Renal agenesis is the failure of development of one
or both kidneys. Most infants born with bilateral renal agenesis die within
a few hours of birth, but unilateral agenesis rarely causes problems if the
single kidney functions well. A posterior urethral valve is a cause of
urinary tract obstruction in male children. Hydronephrosis describes
distension of the renal pelvis and calyces.


A 45-year-old woman presents to the emergency department with a 12-
hour history of worsening right upper abdominal pain and vomiting. On
examination, she is locally peritonitic in the right upper quadrant. Her
temperature is 38.1°C.
Which of the following treatment options would be indicated in the first
instance?
Cholecystectomy
Intravenous antibiotics
Intravenous steroids
Intravenous proton pump inhibitor
267
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Percutaneous drainage of the gallbladder


ANSWER IS B – Intravenous antibiotics. This patient has presented with
acute cholecystitis, an acute inflammation of the gallbladder secondary
to obstruction of the cystic duct. Ninety percent of cases are due to
gallstones but in 10% no cause of obstruction is found (acute acalculous
cholecystitis). Acalculous cholecystitis is most common at the extremes
of age and is associated with major trauma, burns and surgery.
Obstruction of the cystic duct results in chemical irritation (secondary to
stasis of bile) and bacterial infection ensues. Symptoms of acute
cholecystitis include upper abdominal pain, usually in the right upper
quadrant, which may radiate to the back and shoulder tip. There is often
associated vomiting. The presence of systemic upset, e.g. fever and
elevation of inflammatory markers, helps to differentiate this from simple
biliary colic. Murphy sign – pain on palpation below the right costal
margin in the mid-clavicular line during inspiration – is a clinically useful
sign (it can also be done with the ultrasound probe) but is present in only
40% of cases. Ultrasound investigation confirms the diagnosis. The
treatment of acute cholecystitis includes intravenous fluids, intravenous
antibiotics and analgesia. Symptoms usually resolve spontaneously
within days without further intervention. Ongoing infection will result in an
empyema of the gallbladder (a mass will develop as the gallbladder fills
with pus) and this requires urgent drainage. Cholecystectomy is usually
performed as an elective procedure 6 weeks after the resolution of
symptoms (to reduce the risk of septicaemia) but may be performed as
an emergency procedure if symptoms do not settle with conservative
management.


59-year-old man presents with an 8-month history of urinary hesitancy,
poor stream and the sensation of incomplete bladder emptying. He is
oth-erwise well. On examination, his prostate is homogeneously
enlarged and smooth.
Which of the following interventions would be indicated?
A. Bladder neck incision
B. Brachytherapy
C. External beam radiotherapy
D. Radical prostatectomy

268
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


E. Transurethral resection of prostate


ANSWER IS E – Transurethral resection of prostate. Benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH) is the most common benign neoplasia, characterized
by the formation of nodules in the periurethral region of the prostate. At
least half of all men have BPH by the age of 60 and its incidence
increases with age. BPH results in bladder flow obstruction and
symptoms include hesitancy, poor stream, and incomplete emptying of
the bladder leading to frequency of micturition, nocturia and haematuria.
BPH may also present with acute urinary retention. Long-standing
obstruction can lead to bilateral hydronephrosis and renal failure.
Specific investigations include urodynamic studies (assessing urinary
flow rates) and the measurement of residual urinary volume. Treatment
options in symptomatic patients include medical therapy and surgical
intervention. Commonly used drugs include alpha blockers (e.g.
tamsulosin), which reduce smooth muscle tone and decrease bladder
outflow resistance, and finasteride (a 5-α reductase inhibitor) that inhibits
the conversion of testosterone to the active dihydrotestosterone.
Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) is indicated when
medical treatment has failed; it is the most commonly performed
operation in men and considered the ‘gold standard’ of surgical
treatment in BPH. TURP involves shaving the inner portion of the
prostate via a cystoscope. Specific complications of this procedure
include impotence, retrograde ejaculation, incontinence and the need for
a repeat procedure. If the prostate is very large, an open prostatectomy
is preferred. Radical prostatectomy, brachytherapy and external beam
radiation are used in the treatment of prostate cancer. A bladder neck
incision is made when urinary obstruction is secondary to hypertrophy of
the muscles at the bladder neck.
37-year-old woman presents with a 2-day history of increasing pain and
swelling of the right middle finger. She tells you she sustained a minor
cut to the inner surface of the finger 4 days ago. On examination, the
finger is grossly swollen, red and held in the flexed position.
Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Fascial space infection
B. Felon
C. Infective tenosynovitis
D. Paronychia

269
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


E. Whitlow


ANSWER IS C – Infective tenosynovitis. Infective tenosynovitis
describes the infection of the tendon sheath, usually caused by direct
penetrating trauma. The cardinal features of tendon sheath infections
are summarized by Kanavel signs: (1) tenderness over the flexor sheath;
(2) pain on passive extension; (3) flexed posture of the digit; and (4)
fusiform swelling of the digit. The tendon sheaths of the thumb and little
finger communicate with the radial and ulna bursa respectively, so
infection of these sheaths will spread to the respective bursa. In at least
50% of people there is communication between the ulna and radial
bursa, providing a further route of spread for infection (horseshoe
tenosynovitis). Treatment may initially be with a period of intravenous
antibiotics but drainage must not be delayed if there is no improvement.


A 27-year-old man presents to the emergency department following an
episode of vomiting blood. On examination he is haemodynamically
stable and is noted to have multiple freckles around his lips and mouth.
A subsequent endoscopy demonstrates multiple polyps throughout the
duodenum which are confirmed as benign. What is the most likely
morphology of the polyps?
Adenomatous polyp
Hamartomatous polyp
Juvenile polyp
Metaplastic polyp
Pseudo-polyp


ANSWER IS B – Hamartomatous polyp. The association of circumoral
freckling with multiple duodenal polyps is known as Peutz-Jeghers
syndrome, a rare autosomal dominant condition. These polyps are
benign hamartomas (a growth that is made up of the same tissues from
which it arises).


A 27-year- old man was admitted to the ward after sustaining a right tibia
and fibula fracture in a road traffic accident. He is currently in an above-
knee backslab with the leg resting on a pillow, awaiting consultant

270
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


review in the morning. You are called to the ward by the nurse saying
the patient is in severe pain despite having morphine 2 hours ago. When
you arrive at the ward the patient is crying in pain and complaining of an
inability to move his toes.
Which of the following is the most appropriate measure to take?
Administer further analgesia and call senior orthopaedic doctor on call
Complete the cast to give more stability to the fracture
Elevate the limb further
Prescribe more regular analgesia and review in the morning
Remove backslab as a temporary measure and review in the morning


ANSWER IS A – Administer further analgesia and call senior
orthopaedic doctor on call. This patient appears to be developing
compartment syndrome, an orthopaedic emergency commonly seen
with long bone fractures, either secondary to the fracture itself or caused
by a tight plaster cast. The senior orthopaedic doctor on call must see
the patient. Compartment syndrome is caused by increased pressure in
the osteofascial compartment leading to swelling, venous engorgement
and later to arterial compromise and ischaemia. If left untreated,
necrosis can develop within 12 hours leading to muscle death,
contractures and irreversible nerve injury. Initially the only finding is
increased pain that is out of proportion to the injury, with increase in pain
on passive extension of the muscle compartments and some sensory
deficit. Pallor, pulselessness and paralysis are late features of
compartment syndrome and diagnosis must not be delayed until these
features are present. Urgent decompression of the limb is required, and
if compartment pressures are greater than 40 mmHg urgent fasciotomy
is indicated.


A 27-year-old man is admitted to the high dependency ward having sus-
tained a significant head injury. Two days later he starts vomiting blood.
Which of the following is the most likely cause?
Curling ulcer
Cushing ulcer
Decubitus ulcer
Dendritic ulcer

271
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Martorell’s ulcer


ANSWER IS B – Cushing ulcer. A Cushing ulcer is the development of
acute peptic ulceration in the setting of raised intracranial pressure, e.g.
after intracranial bleed or traumatic brain injury. These ulcers most
commonly develop within the antrum of the stomach, although the first
part of the duodenum may also be affected. It is thought that ulceration
is secondary to stimulation of the vagus nerve within the brain, leading to
increased gastric acid secretion. The development of Cushing ulcers is
known as the Rokitansky-Cushing Syndrome. A Curling ulcer is an acute
ulcer of the duodenum that occurs a few days following severe burns.
The reduced plasma volume following burns injury results in necrosis of
the gastric mucosa, with ensuing ulceration and perforation. Decubitus
ulcer is another name for a pressure sore. These develop secondary to
continued pressure on the skin from lack of mobility, leading to skin
necrosis and breakdown. They commonly occur over bony prominences,
e.g. ischial tuberosities, sacrum and malleoli. Dendritic ulcers are painful
corneal ulcers caused by herpes simplex type 1. They are visible with
fluorescein staining and have a characteristic ‘branched’ appearance,
giving them their name. A Martorell ulcer is an ischaemic ulcer of the leg
above the ankle that occurs secondary to hypertension.


An 81-year-old woman from a nursing home is brought into the emer-
gency department following a fall. She is complaining of pain in her left
hip. On examination, her left leg is shortened and externally rotated. The
home tells you this woman has dementia but is able to mobilize indepen-
dently with a frame. An X-ray shows a displaced intracapsular femoral
neck fracture.
Which of the following would be the most suitable management option?
Allow the patient to try to mobilize
Dynamic hip screw
Hemiarthroplasty
Open reduction and internal fixation
Total hip replacement


ANSWER IS C – Hemiarthroplasty. The blood supply to the femoral
head comprises the intramedullary vessels, the vessels in the
272
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


retinaculum of the joint capsule and through the ligamentum teres
(although at this age this may be obsolete). The choice of treatment
largely depends upon the disruption to the blood supply caused by the
fracture. Partial and undisplaced fractures through the femoral neck
(Garden I and II fractures) may be fixed using a dynamic hip screw, as
can intertrochanteric and subtrochanteric fractures. Minimally and
completely displaced fractures (Garden III and IV) are likely to have
severe disruption to the blood supply of the femoral head, leading to
impaired healing and a risk of avascular necrosis; hence the head will
need to be removed and replaced with a prosthesis (hemiarthroplasty).
In fitter patients, a total hip replacement may be considered, but as this
patient has dementia she is not a candidate. In younger patients (below
the age of 60–65) much effort is made to preserve the femoral head, and
open reduction and internal fixation is often attempted. In treating
impacted neck of femur fractures, if not too painful, a watch and wait
policy is sometimes adopted as healing may occur without intervention.




Intussusception is most common in which of the following? Single best
answer - select one answer only.
A. Females in the summer months
B. Females in the winter months
C. Females regardless of the time of year
D. Males in the summer months
E. Males in the winter months.


ANSWER IS E
Intussusception is the telescoping of one part of the intestine into the
other and is most common in infants aged 4 monts to 1 year, with peak
incidence between 6-9 months. It is more common in the winter months
and in males.


A 25-year-old female presents with pain in the right hand which is
associated with a tingling sensation and weakness. After further
investigation she is diagnosed with thoracic outlet syndrome. The
affected neurovascular bundle runs through which muscles?
A. Digastric
273
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


B. Platysma
C. Scalene
D. Sternocleidomastoid
E. Sternothyroid.


ANSWER IS C
Thoracic outlet syndrome is caused by compression of the
neurovascular bundle that passes between the anterior and middle
scalene muscles. The brachial plexus and the subclavian artery and
(rarely) the subclavian vein can be affected, leading to a variety of upper
limb, neck and upper back symptoms. Cervical ribs, Pancoast‟s tumour
and preganancy can all cause the condition, but it is usually secondary
to trauma or repetitive strain injuries.


A 20-year-old girl presented with a unilateral conductive hearing loss;
otoscopy revealed characteristics of Cholesteatoma of the middle ear.
What would be the most appropriate management plan?
A. As it is a benign tumour composed of cholesterol it should be left
alone
B. It should be completely removed at initial surgery
C. It could be left as it does not pose a risk of meningitis
D. As it usually presents with a neck abscess it should be treated with
incision and drainage
E. Radiotherapy is appropriate and effective as it is composed of
atypical cells.


ANSWER IS B

Cholesteatoma derived its name from early observations that it
resembled a ball of cholesterol. Although given the suffix –oma, it does
not behave like a tumour, nor is it composed of atypical cells suggestive
of a tumour.
It is in fact a non-cleaning squamous cell cyst that can cause
complications if untreated, due to its invasive properties, including
meningitis, brain abscess, hearing loss, neck abscess (Bezold‟s
abscess, very rare), lateral sinus thrombosis, facial nerve palsy and
vertigo.

274
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


It usually presents with continuously discharging ears and otalgia.
Treatment is regular cleaning and exteriorisation in the form of
mastoidectomy and variations of this procedure.


A 68-year-old man presents with mechanical hip pain. What is the first
radiographic sign to appear in osteoartritis?
A. Narrowing joint space
B. Osteopenia
C. Osteophytes
D. Soft tissue swelling
E. Subchondral sclerosis


ANSWER IS A
The classic radiographic signs of osteoarthritis are: joint space
narrowing, subchondral sclerosis, osteophytes and subchondral cysts.
Osteopenia and soft tissue swelling are often associated with
rheumatoid arthritis.


A 50-year-old gentleman is being prepared to undergo a Femoral
Popliteal Bypass procedure for intermittent claudication. He is a smoker
and has Type II Diabetes mellitus. Which of the following is true? Select
one answer only.
A. Chlorpropamide can usually be given on the day of surgery
B. Hypokalaemia may occur secondary to peri-operative insulin use
C. It is important to maintain the blood sugar below 8 mM throughout the
operation
D. The metabolic response to surgery lowers blood sugar
E. The risk of cardiac death is not significant.
ANSWER IS B
Hypoglycaemia is a severe threat to the anaesthetised diabetic patient. It
is therefore important to avoid any hypoglycaemic agents which may
have a prolonged effect. Tight blood sugar control perioperatively is less
critical than avoiding hypoglycaemia. Diabetics have a higher incidence
of vascular disease and higher death rate from cardiac disease. Diabetic
nephropathy may make hyperglycaemia a perioperative problem. In
addition, the use of insulin (i.e. in the form of a sliding scale) during this

275
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


patient‟s preoperative care carries a risk of hypokalaemia , as insulin
increases cellular uptake of potassium ions.


During an inguinal hernia repair in a 54-year-old man, the ilioinguinal
nerve is injured in the inguinal canal. This will most likely result in which
of the following? Single best answer question – choose ONE true option
only.
A. Paraesthesia over the dorsum of the penis
B. Paraesthesia over the pubis and scrotum, and loss of cremasteric
contraction
C. Paraesthesia over the pubis and anterior scrotum only
D. Paraesthesia over the anterior and medial thigh
E. Paraesthesia over the pubis only.


ANSWER IS C
An injury to the ilioinguinal nerve within the inguinal canal may result in
parasthesia over the pubis and anterior scrotum. The ilioinginal nerve
(L1) passes through the internal oblique muscle to enter the inguinal
canal laterally. It passes anterior to the cord and exits the superficial ring
to provide sensation to the mons pubis and anterior scrotum in the male
and labia majora in the female.
Which of the following statements regarding the spinal arachnoid mater
is CORRECT? Single best answer question – choose ONE true option
only.
A. It is very thick compared with the cranial part
B. It is separated from the dura by the subarachnoid space
C. It forms the denticulate ligaments
D. It invests the cauda equina
E. It has a rich plexus of nerves derived from the vagus.


ANSWER IS D
The spinal part of the arachnoid is a thin, delicate, tubular membrane
loosely investing the spinal cord. Above, it is continuous with the cranial
arachnoid. Below, it widens out and invests the cauda equina and the
nerves proceeding from it.
It is separated from the dura mater by the subdural space, but here and
there this space is traversed by isolated connective-tissue trabeculae,
276
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


which are most numerous on the posterior surface of the spinal cord.
The arachnoid surrounds the cranial and spinal nerves and encloses
them in loose sheaths as far as their points of exit from the skull and
vertebral canal.
The arachnoid consists of bundles of white fibrous and elastic tissue
intimately blended together. Its outer surface is covered with a layer of
low cuboidal mesothelium. The inner surface and the trabeculae are
likewise covered by a somewhat low type of cuboidal mesothelium,
which in places is flattened to a pavement type. Vessels of considerable
size, but few in number, and a rich plexus of nerves derived from the
motor root of the trigeminal, the facial and the accessory nerves, are
found in the arachnoid.


The radial artery crosses the floor of the anatomical snuffbox. What are
the anterior and posterior boundaries of the anatomical snuffbox? Single
best answer – Select one answer only.
A. Anterior: flexor pollicis longus - Posterior: extensor pollicis longus
B. Anterior: abductor pollicis brevis and extensor pollicis longus -
Posterior: abductor pollicis longus
C. Anterior: Abductor pollicis brevis and extensor pollicis brevis –
Posterior: abductor pollicis longus
D. Anterior: Extensor pollicis brevis and abductor pollicis longus –
Posterior: Extensor pollicis longus
E. Anterior: Extensor pollicis longus and abductor pollicis longus –
Posterior: Extensor pollicis brevis.


 ANSWER IS D
As it leaves the cubital region, the radial artery passes medial to the
biceps tendon, and superficial to the insertion of the pronator teres
muscle. At the wrist, the artery passes across the floor of the anatomical
snuffbox over the trapezium, and enters the hand between the two
heads of the first dorsal interosseous and the oblique and transverse
heads of the adductor pollicis muscles, continuing as the deep palmar
arch. The arch is completed medially by a branch of the ulnar artery and
allows for anastomosis between these two arteries. The boundaries of
the anatomical snuffbox are extensor pollicis brevis and abductor pollicis
longus anteriorly. Posteriorly we have extensor pollicis longus.


277
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Proximally the border is formed by the radial styloid procosess. The floor
is formed by the trapezium and scaphoid.


A 30-year-old gentleman with ulcerative colitis attends the
coloproctology clinic following a Gastroenterology referral for restorative
proctolcolectomy. Which of the following is most accurate regarding
restorative proctolcolectomy?
A. Pouch failure is likely in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis
B. Pouch surveillance is mandatory in all cases of ulcerative colitis
C. Pouchitis is common with restorative procotocolectomy
D. Restorative proctolcolectomy is a three-stage procedure
E. Restorative proctolcolectomy is contra-indicated in patients who have
an internal anal sphincter defect.


ANSWER IS A
Incompetent ileocaecal valves are not uncommon and can lead to a
„backwash‟ ileitis, making distinction from Crohn‟s or a mixed colitis
difficult. Remember, ulcerative colitis (UC) starts as a proctitis and
ascends in a continuous fashion. UC has many extra-intestinal
manifestations, of which uveitis is one. It is associated to the HLA-B27
phenotype. UC by definition is generally restricted to the colon and so
sparing the small bowel. Malabsorption is a definite problem with
Crohn‟s disease. Restorative proctolcolectomy is a procedure by which
a pouch from terminal ileum is fashioned and anastomosed to the anus,
12cm above the dentate line. The pouch is usually J in shape and
measures 15cm in length. RPC is recommended in ulcerative colitis and
FAP where the colon needs to be removed to eliminate the risk of colon
cancer.
The incidence of pouch failure is 5-15 % per year and reasons include
pelvic sepsis, poor function and pouchitis. Pouch surveillance is
recommended for those who have colonic dysplasia or neoplasm, as
there are rare case reports of neoplasm developing within the pouch.
Ideal pouch function is approximately 4-6 times per day and two times at
night. The benefit of the pouch is to eliminate urgency and avoid a
permanent ileostomy. RPC should be a one stage or two stage
operation (if a defunctioning stome is employed).



278
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


You take arterial blood gases for one of your patients and go to ICU to
use the machine to analyse them. The ICU consultant asks you how you
might tell if the sample is arterial or venous from the results. Single best
answer.
A. Systemic venous blood has a PaO2 of about 100 mmHg at rest
B. Systemic venous blood has a PaO2 of about 80mmHg at rest
C. Systemic venous blood has a PaO2 of about 60mmHg at rest
D. Systemic venous blood has a PaO2 of about 40mmHg at rest
E. Systemic venous blood has a PaO2 of about 20mmHg at rest.


ANSWER IS D
Blood in the systemic arteries has a paO2 of 100 mmHg or 97%. Blood
in the systemic veins has a paO2 of 40 mmHg and 75% saturation at
rest.


Nitric oxide (NO) is an important cellular signalling molecule, involved in
several pathological processes. Which of the following occurs as a
consequence of its release? Select one answer only.
A. Bronchial smooth muscle relaxation
B. Gastrointestinal smooth muscle contraction
C. Platelet aggregation
D. Smooth muscle proliferation
E. Vascoconstriction of smooth muscle.


ANSWER IS A
Nitric oxide is a molecule with broad and diverse effects. It was first
described in 1980 as a product of endothelial cells that causes
vasorelaxation. This product was called endothelium-derived relaxing
factor (EDRF) and was eventually shown to be nitric oxide. Nitric oxide is
known to be produced by many cell types and to exert a wide range of
biological effects. The physiological actions of nitric oxide include
relaxation of gastrointestinal smooth muscle and bronchial smooth
muscle, maintenance of vascular integrity, and inhibition of smooth
muscle migration and proliferation. Endothelial nitric oxide also plays a
critical role in haemostasis, making an important contribution to the
normal inhibition of platelet function. Inhibition of platelet adhesion is a
property of nitric oxide. Nitric oxide is also an important determinant of

279
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


blood cell flow and is thought to be involved in immune and inflammatory
responses via its production in macrophages, lymphocytes and
neutrophils. Nitric oxide is synthesised by a family of enzymes, the nitric
oxide synthetases.


A 29-year-old woman with a BMI of more than 40 kg/m2 undergoes a
gastric bypass procedure. Which of the following is the most appropriate
statement regarding this procedure? Select one answer only.
A. A 10% loss in weight results in a 10% reduction in the risk of heart
disease
B. An adjustable gastric band forms an integral part of the procedure
C. Iron and Vitamin B12 deficiency are common
D. Jejuno-ileal bypass with cholecystectomy is the preferred option
E. Weight loss from a biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch is
more effective than biliopancreatic diversion alone.


ANSWER IS C
Surgery for morbid obesity is considered in individuals who have a BMI
more than 40 kg/m2. Obesity surgery for patients with a BMI between
35-39 kg/m2 may be justified if they have a co-morbid condition that will
be improved by weight loss. The decision to operate must be made
within a dedicated multidisciplinary team comprising a Bariatric surgeon,
Dietician, Physician, Anaesthetist, Radiologist and Clinical Nurse
Specialist. The conditions that can be improved by weight loss include
Type II Diabetes mellitus, Hypertension and Dyslipidaemia (the
metabolic syndrome). Others include obstructive sleep apnoea,
decreased mobility, Osteoarthritis and Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and
poor quality of life. The surgery can be broadly classified into Restrictive
and Malabsorptive. The former consists of gastric banding or vertical
banded gastroplasty. The latter is achieved by bypass procedures
whereby the optimal length of the absorptive small intestine is 200 cm.
This is combined with a gastroplasty and a Roux-en-Y loop. Jejuno-ileal
bypass has fallen from favour as it has been associated with serious
complications. The Framingham study has shown that weight reduction
of 10% is associated with a 20% reduction in the risk of heart disease.




280
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


You are treating a patient who has been found to have liver metastases,
what is the commonest site of primary tumour spreading to the liver?
Single best answer.
A. Breast cancer
B. Colorectal cancer
C. Lymphoma
D. Melanoma
E. Prostate cancer


ANSWER IS B
The liver is a very common site of secondary metastases, with
secondary spread to the liver more common than primary cancers.
Spread to the liver can occur from many different primary tumours and
all the tumours in the question can metastasize to the liver, but the
commonest site of primary tumour metastasizing to the liver is GI
malignancy.


The tibial nerve is a branch of the sciatic nerve that passes through the
popliteal fossa. What is the main cutaneous branch of the tibial nerve in
the popliteal fossa?
A. Articular branch to the knee joint
B. Gives off the sural nerve as a branch
C. The common peroneal nerve is a branch of the tibial nerve
D. The medial plantar nerve is a branch of tibial nerve in the popliteal
fossa
E. The posterior femoral cutaneous nerve.


ANSWER IS B
The tibial nerve is the large terminal branch of the sciatic nerve. It runs
through the popliteal fossa, at first lying on the lateral side, then crossing
medial to the popliteal artery. It leaves the fossa by passing deep to
gastrocnemius and soleus. The tibial nerve supplies the knee joint,
popliteus, and the posterior compartment muscles of the leg and the
foot.




281
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


A 26-year-old man is admitted with a painful right shoulder following a
high speed RTA. Plain radiographs reveal a fractured scapula. He
appears systemically well but undergoes a full body CT scan as the
casualty registrar quite correctly recognises that this fracture carries a
high risk of concomitant soft tissue injury. In which of the following bones
does a fracture indicate high energy trauma which could be associated
with hidden severe injuries?
A. Femur
B. Clavicle
C. Tibia
D. 10th rib
E. 1st rib


ANSWER IS E
The 1st rib, sternum and scapula are both notoriously difficult to break
but also act as guardians to the underlying soft tissue structures which
are otherwise relatively well protected. If these bony structures are
breached, it is assumed that there may be underlying damage to the
cardiopulmonary apparatus or great vessels. The other bones
mentioned also require force to break them but tend not to be associated
with underlying injury.
A 69-year-old man with recent onset fast atrial fibrillation presents to
A&E with acute, severe periumbilical abdominal pain. Arterial blood gas
reveals a raised lactate. CT-Scanning confirms extensive ischaemic
small bowel. The patient is taken to theatre for a laparotomy and small
bowel resection. Which feature best differentiates the upper jejunum
from the lower ileum? Single best answer - select one answer only.
A. A thinner wall
B. Fewer circular folds
C. Less fat at the mesenteric border
D. More aggregated lymphatic follicles (Peyer’s patches)
E. More arterial arcades.


ANSWER IS C
The jejunum has a thicker wall, less mesenteric fat, more plicae
circulares, a wider lumen, fewer Peyer‟s patches and fewer arterial
arcades than the ileum.

282
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


A vascular surgeon considers the use of cerebrospinal fl uid drainage
during thoracic endovascular aneurysm repair, to reduce the risk of
spinal cord ischaemia. Which of the following statements regarding the
blood supply of the spinal cord is true?
A. The artery of Adamkiewicz commonly arises from a posterior
intercostal artery between T3 and T7
B. The conus medullaris is the site of anastomosis of the anterior spinal
artery with the posterior spinal arteries
C. The internal carotid arteries give rise to the anterior spinal artery
D. The paired anterior spinal arteries supply the anterior two-thirds of the
spinal cord
E. The posterior spinal arteries supply the posterior two-thirds of the
spinal cord


ANSWER IS B
The artery of Adamkiewicz (i.e. the ‘greater radicular artery’) usually
arises from a left intercos-tal branch of the aorta between T8 and T12,
and supplies the anterior spinal artery and distal spinal cord.
The anterior spinal artery is an unpaired vessel that arises from the
vertebral arteries (i.e. not the carotids), which unite below the foramen
magnum to form a single anterior spinal artery. This artery then supplies
the pia mater and anterior two-thirds of the spinal cord, including the
anterior and lateral columns (i.e. the major motor tracts). It anastomoses
with the posterior spinal arteries over the conus medullaris.
The posterior spinal arteries arise from the vertebral arteries. They pass
down the spinal cord individually and supply the posterior one-third of
the spinal cord (i.e. including the major sensory tracts).
The blood supply of the anterior and posterior spinal arteries is
augmented by collateral radicu-lar arteries—the most important of these
are the branches of the posterior intercostal arteries at the sites of the
cervical and lumbar cord enlargements.


A 29-year-old motor cyclist involved in a high-speed road traffi c accident
(RTA) is brought to the Emergency Department by the paramedics. He
is conscious but is complaining of severe discomfort in his lower
abdominal region. On examination, he appears to be in hypovolaemic
shock with a blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg and a pulse rate of
114/min. Palpation reveals marked tenderness over the suprapubic

283
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


region and the iliac crests bilaterally. Further examination reveals the
pelvis to be unstable, suggesting a fracture. Bruising is noted over the
penis, scrotum, and the perineum. A per rectal examination reveals a
high riding prostate. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Injury to the spermatic cord
B. Injury to the peripheral sacral nerves
C. Injury to the cauda equina
D. Injury to the prostate
E. Injury to the urethra


ANSWER IS E
The signs and symptoms in this patient are highly suggestive of a
urethral injury. Hypovolaemia is due to the loss of blood from the
associated pelvic fracture. Urethral injury should be sus-pected in the
setting of pelvic fractures, straddle-type injuries, traumatic
catheterization, or any penetrating injury to the perineal region. Amongst
others, the important symptoms of urethral injury include pain, inability to
pass urine, and haematuria (macroscopic or microscopic). Physical
examination may reveal blood at the urethral meatus and a high-riding
prostate may be identi-

fi ed upon rectal examination. Extravasation of blood may occur along
the fascial planes leading to bruising in the perineum, scrotum, and
penis. The urethra may be injured anywhere along its course. The
membranous urethra is more prone to injury from pelvic fractures
because the puboprostatic ligaments fi x the apex of the prostate gland
to the bony pelvis and thus cause shearing of the urethra when the
pelvis is displaced. The bulbar urethra is susceptible to blunt force
injuries because of its path along the perineum. Straddle-type injuries
from falls or kicks to the perineal area can result in injury to the bulbar
urethra. The penile urethra is less likely to be injured from external
trauma because of its mobility, but iatrogenic injury may occur during
cath-eterization or cystoscopy. If urethral injury is suspected, the patient
should be discouraged from passing urine. Urethral catheterization
should be avoided. Retrograde urography is the investiga-tion of choice
in suspected urethral injuries. If surgical intervention is required, then
suprapubic catheterization may be required. Complications of urethral
injuries include infection, bleeding, stricture, erectile dysfunction, and
urinary incontinence.

284
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A




A 10-year-old boy bleeds excessively after circumcision. Blood tests
show a normal platelet count, a normal international normalized ratio
(INR) but an elevated activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT). What
is the most likely cause of the bleeding?
A. Haemophilia A
B. Protein C defi ciency
C. Factor V defi ciency
D. Von Willebrand’s disease
E. Christmas disease


 ANSWER IS D
Von Willebrand’s disease is an autosomal dominant disorder that causes
a defi ciency of von Willebrand factor, resulting in reduced platelet
adherence to exposed vascular endothelium and instability of factor
VIII:C. It is the most common inherited disorder, with some degree of
defi ciency detectable in 1% of the population. Clinical features are
usually mild, and include bleeding that follows minor trauma or surgery.
Platelet count, INR, fi brinogen levels are normal, while APTT and
bleeding time are prolonged. Factor VII levels and von Willebrand factor
are found to be low. Perioperative management of this condition
includes desmopressin being given preoperatively and a short course of
anti-fi brinolytic therapy given postoperatively.


A 68-year-old previously healthy woman is brought to the Emergency
Department by ambulance in an unconscious state, after having slipped
on ice and hitting her head on the pavement. After initial resuscitation, a
CT scan of her brain demonstrates a recent right-sided extradural
haematoma. However, it also demonstrates the incidental fi nding of a
space-occupying lesion in the left temporal lobe with an enhancing ring
around an area of presumed necrosis. The radiologist is concerned that
this incidental fi nding is suggestive of malignancy. What type of
malignancy is this lesion most likely to represent?
A. Astrocytoma
B. Ependymoma
C. Glioblastoma multiforme



285
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


D. Meningioma
E. Oligodendroglioma
 ANSWER IS C
Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common and most aggressive type
of primary brain tumour in humans, involving glial cells and accounting
for over 50% of all parenchymal brain tumours and about 20% of all
intracranial tumours. They have a peak incidence between 55–65 years
of age.
The CT fi ndings described in this scenario are also typical of
glioblastoma (i.e. a ‘ring-enhancing’ lesion, although this is not specifi c;
other pathologies such as abscesses, metastases, tumefactive multiple
sclerosis, etc. may demonstrate similar appearances). The site of this
patient’s tumour excludes a meningioma, as it is reported to be in the
temporal lobe and is therefore intrinsic. Ependymomas are tumours
arising from the ependyma, a tissue of the central nervous system; they
usually arise in the fourth ventricle. Astrocytomas account for about 10%
of primary brain tumours in adults but are more common in children.
Oligodendrogliomas occur primarily in adults (9%) of all primary brain
and central nervous system tumours) but are also found in chil-dren
(4%).


An 82-year-old woman, who is normally healthy and independently
mobile, presents to the Emergency Department complaining of severe
hip pain after sustaining a mechanical fall. Plain radiography of her
pelvis reveals an undisplaced intracapsular fracture of the femoral neck.
No signs of osteoarthritis are visible on the radiograph. What is the best
form of treatment for this patient’s hip fracture?
A. Cannulated screw fi xation
B. Cemented Thompson’s hemiarthroplasty
C. Dynamic hip screw
D. Non-surgical management
E. Total hip replacement


ANSWER IS A
It is common that patients with fractured femoral necks, who are also
eligible for surgery, would proceed to have surgical fi xation of their
injuries. This relatively fi t patient (i.e. advanced age alone should not

286
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


preclude surgical intervention in any patient) has an undisplaced
intracapsular fracture of her femoral neck and so fi xation with
cannulated screws would be the most appro-priate therapeutic option for
her. If the patient had an osteoarthritic hip and was independently
mobile, a total hip replacement would be more appropriate. Dynamic hip
screws are employed for extracapsular fracture fi xation.


Which of the following is not true about haemorrhoids?
A. Haemorrhoids are formed by the expansion of the endoanal cushions
B. Portal hypertension may result in haemorrhoids
C. Blood supply is mainly from the superior rectal artery
D. Internal haemorrhoids are lined by columnar and transitional
epithelium
E. External haemorrhoids are lined by transitional and squamous
epithelium


ANSWER IS B
Anorectal vascular cushions are normally present in the anal canal. They
commonly form three prominent cushions and help maintain continence
for liquid and gas. They are formed from mucosa, submucosal
connective tissue, and associated blood vessels. Expansion of the
endoanal cushions (vascular and associated connective tissue) results
in haemorrhoids. Arterial supply to the endoanal cushions mainly comes
from the lower rectal submucosal vascular network (from the superior
rectal artery) reinforced by perforating branches from the inferior rectal
artery (from the pudendal artery). Precipitating factors include:
constipation, prolonged straining at stool, obesity, family history, and
previous rectal surgery. Portal hypertension may result in rectal varices
but not haemorrhoids.


The following are the blood results of a 70-year-old man: Sodium: 128
mmol/L Potassium: 4 mmol/L Urea: 5 mmol/L Creatinine: 89 mmol/L
Glucose: 13 mmol/L What is the serum osmolality (mOsmol/kg)?
A. 290
B. 288
C. 282


287
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


D. 269
E. 275


ANSWER IS C
The intracellular and extracellular compartments are separated by cell
membranes which are extremely permeable to water but less so to
electrolytes. Sodium pumps in the cell membrane pump sodium out of
the cell. This means that the distribution of water between the two com-
partments is largely determined by the osmotic effect of electrolytes in
the extracellular fl uid and the proteins within the cell.
Osmotic pressure is the pressure required to prevent osmosis and is
directly proportional to the concentration of osmotically active particles in
the solution. ‘Osmoles’ refers to the number of osmotically active
particles in a solution; it is the standard unit of osmotic pressure.
Osmolality is the number of osmoles of solute per kilogram solvent
(mOsmol/kg). Osmolarity is the number of osmoles of solute per litre
solution (mOsmol/L).
Plasma osmolality (mOsmol/kg) is estimated by: 2(Na + K) + urea +
glucose, which in this case, is approximately equal to 282 mOsmol/kg.


A 45-year-old jockey falls off his horse and sustains a fracture of his
distal tibia involving the ankle joint. After initial resuscitation, a senior
orthopaedic review determines that stability will be best achieved by
external fi xation with a quadrilateral frame. This involves a pin placed in
the proximal tibia, linked by rods to another pin which is placed through
the calcaneum. The distal pin is inserted from the medial aspect of the
calcaneum, about an inch (2.5 cm) superior and towards the toes, away
from the heel. Which local nerve is most likely to be damaged by
improper pin placement?
A. Deep fi bular (peroneal) nerve
B. Lateral plantar nerve
C. Medial plantar nerve
D. Saphenous nerve
E. Superfi cial fi bular (peroneal) nerve
ANSWER IS C
This patient has sustained a tibial plafond fracture (also known as a tibial
pilon fracture) at the distal tibia and involving the ankle joint. As is the

288
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


case with tibial plateau fractures, these injuries occur close to the joint
surface and must be treated with the joint cartilage surface in mind. The
various management options for tibial plafond fractures include casting,
external fi xation, limited internal fi xation, internal fi xation, and ankle
fusion. In this case, external fi xation is the treatment of choice and this
involves insertion of a distal pin in the region of the medial calcaneum,
where the medial plantar nerve runs and this may potentially be
damaged. The medial plantar nerve is the larger of the two terminal
divisions of the tibial nerve and accompanies the medial plantar artery
along its course.


A 31-year-old woman who is due for an elective cholecystectomy
presents to the Emergency Department with sudden-onset right-sided
weakness approximately 2 days after returning to the United Kingdom
from South East Asia. She has no signifi cant past medical history and
physical examination is normal. Chest radiography, electrocardiogram
(ECG), and a computed tomography (CT) head scan are entirely normal.
Which one of the following investigations is most likely to reveal the
cause of her presentation?
A. Carotid Doppler ultrasonography
B. Cerebral angiography
C. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head
D. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE)
E. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE)


 ANSWER IS D
This patient’s history (i.e. acute onset cerebrovascular symptoms on a
background of recent travel) suggests a lower limb deep vein thrombosis
with peripheral embolus through a patent foramen ovale, leading to a
left-sided cerebrovascular event (i.e. a ‘paradoxical embolus’). TOE is
the imaging of choice for investigation of a patent foramen ovale,
although TTE with contrast may be a more practical alternative (due to
the better availability and non-invasive nature of TTE). Upon confi
rmation of the diagnosis, patients with a patent foramen ovale do not
require treatment if asymptomatic. Anticoagulation may be considered
after the fi rst presentation of stroke or transient ischaemic attack (TIA)
to prevent recurrent episodes. Closure of the defect (i.e. if recommended
by a cardiologist) is most frequently performed percutaneously, rather

289
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


than via an open approach. Cardiac catheterization is fi rst performed to
assess suitability for this.


When considering the use of anaesthesia for abdominal aortic aneurysm
(AAA) repair, which of the following statements is incorrect?
A. Aggressive preoperative fl uid resuscitation is contraindicated
B. Patients should be anaesthetized after their skin is prepared and
draped in the emergency setting
C. Vasodilators should be given following infrarenal cross clamping,
during elective AAA repair
D. Blood pressure and cardiac output usually increase during aortic
cross clamping
E. Patients with aorto-occlusive disease have an exaggerated
hypertension and arterial hypertension during cross-clamping


ANSWER IS E
When considering anaesthesia for elective AAA repair, epidural
anaesthesia have not been shown to decrease mortality when compared
to general anaesthesia. However, it provides a better form of
postoperative analgesia leading to early extubation and fewer pulmonary
complications. Patients will usually have arterial and central venous
pressure monitoring as well as temperature, urine output and fi ve-lead
ECG measurements. Cardiac output monitoring is not performed
routinely. A prophylactic dose of heparin is given prior to cross clamping
as this has been shown to reduce thrombotic and embolic complications.
Infra-renal aortic cross clamping performed during open AAA repair
results in increased vascular resistance and hypertension as BP = CO

SVR. Patients with coronary artery disease may struggle with this
increased cardiac workload and develop cardiac failure, which may be
amenable to vasodilator therapy at this stage. Patients with severe
aorto-iliac disease would have a developed collateral circulation and
show minimal response to cross clamping. Unclamping results in
dramatic falls in systemic vascular resistance and BP due to the release
of vasoactive cytokines and toxic metabolites from ischaemic tissue. In
the emergency setting, the patient’s skin should be prepared and draped
prior to rapid sequence induction. This is because the loss of abdominal


290
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


tone and the negatively inotropic and vasodilatory effects of anaesthetic
agents may result in severe hypotension upon induction.


A 47-year-old alcoholic presents to the Emergency Department with
central abdominal pain and vomiting. She prefers to sit up as the pain
aggravates on lying supine and on eating. On examination, her pulse
rate is 140/min, her temperature is 38.2°C, and there is periumbilical
discoloration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Acute pancreatitis
B. Ruptured ovarian follicle
C. Crohn’s disease
D. Urinary tract infection
E. Pyelonephritis


ANSWER IS A

Recognized causes of acute pancreatitis include gallstones (50%),
alcohol (25%), trauma, certain drugs (e.g. steroids, azathioprine, and
thiazide diuretics), mumps, autoimmune pancreatitis, scorpion venom
(rare), hyperlipidaemia, hypercalcaemia, and endoscopic retrograde
cholangio-pancreatography (ERCP). Pancreatitis results from the early
activation of pancreatic enzymes, producing autodigestion of the
pancreas and surrounding tissues. Exposure of trypsinogen to lysosomal
enzymes such as cathepsin B has been elucidated as a mechanism for
early trypsin activation. Digestive enzyme release is amplifi ed as acinar
cells lyse, leading to a vicious cycle of infl ammation and necrosis. The
common presentations include central abdominal pain that starts at a
low intensity and gradually increases in severity. The pain may radiate to
the back, may be associated with nausea and vomiting, and may be
improved by sitting forward. On examination, the patient may be
tachycardic with fever and jaundice; in acute haemorrhagic pancreatitis,
there may be periumbilical discoloration (Cullen’s sign) or bruising of the
fl anks (Grey–Turner’s sign). Blood tests will usually show signifi cantly
raised serum amylase levels. Management includes keeping the patient
nil by mouth. Consider administering intravenous (IV) fl uids and plasma
expanders if the urine output falls to less than 30 mL/hour. For
analgesia, give morphine and ensure that the vital signs are recorded


291
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


regularly. Complications include intra-abdominal sepsis, pseudocyst,
shock, renal failure, and pancreatic necrosis.


A 54-year-old woman presents with a 1-month history of a painful right
shoulder. The pain is present on almost all movements and movements
in the joint are restricted because of the pain. Both active and passive
movements result in pain. Plain radiographs of the shoulder are normal.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Acute calcifi c tendonitis
B. Supraspinatus tendonitis
C. Adhesive capsulitis
D. Rotator cuff tear
E. Subacromial bursitis


ANSWER IS C

Adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder) is characterized by a progression
through pain, stiff ness, and resolution over a period of 12–18 months.
The cause is unknown but is thought to be autoimmune and is
particularly prevalent in diabetics. The patient is usually 40–60 years old.
The pain in the shoulder gradually increases over several months and is
worse on all movements (distinguishing it from supraspinatus tendinitis
where pain occurs in a small arc between 60–120° degrees of abduc-
tion). Plain radiographs are normal as opposed to calcifi c tendinitis,
which shows a calcifi cation in the area of the supraspinatus tendon.
Treatment is usually by physiotherapy.


Which among the following statements regarding metaplasia is not
true?
A. Metaplasia is the transformation of one fully diff erentiated cell type
into another
B. Metaplasia may be reversible
C. Barrett’s oesophagus is a type of squamous metaplasia
D. Metaplasia can be a physiological process
E. Metaplasia characterized by abnormal mitosis, pleomorphism, and a
high nuclear/ cytoplasmic ratio


292
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS E
Metaplasia is defi ned as the transformation of one fully differentiated
cell type into another. Metaplasia usually occurs in response to an
environmental stimulus; it is an adaptive process and is usually
reversible. However, metaplasia can progress to dysplasia (e.g. of
bronchial epithelium in smokers) and eventually malignancy if the agent
that caused the metaplastic transformation persists. Barrett’s
oesophagus—replacement of squamous epithelium by gastric epithelium
in patients with refl ux oesophagitis—is a type of epithelial metaplasia.
Metaplasia can also be a physiological process as seen in squamous
metaplasia occurring in the endocervix in response to hormonal surges
during puberty. Abnormal mitosis and cellular atypia including pleomor-
phism, hyperchromatism, and a high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio are
features of dysplasia or malig-nancy, and are not seen in metaplasia


From the following statements regarding normal wound healing, choose
the one statement which is incorrect.
A. Wound healing can proceed in the absence of polymorphonuclear
leucocytes
B. Monocytes are essential for wound healing
C. Collagen is formed by two polypeptide chains
D. Type IV collagen is predominantly seen in the basement membrane
E. The normal ratio of type I to type III collagen in the skin is
approximately 4:1
ANSWER IS C
Acute wound healing occurs as a sequential cascade of overlapping
processes that requires the coordinated completion of a variety of
cellular activities including phagocytosis, chemotaxis, mitogenesis, and
the synthesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) components. These activities
do not occur in a haphazard manner but in a carefully regulated and
systematic cascade that correlates with the appearance of different cell
types in the wound during various stages of the healing process.
Although polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMNLs) are important in the
early stages of the wound healing process, healing can nevertheless
proceed in the absence of PMNLs (and also lymphocytes), but
monocytes are essential for wound healing. Blood monocytes on arriving
to the wound site undergo a phenotypic change to become tissue
macrophages. Collagen is a rod-shaped molecule composed of three

293
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


polypeptide chains that form a rigid triple helical structure (that is 15 Å in
diameter and 3000 Å in length). Collagen is also peculiar in that it is
almost devoid of sulphur-containing amino acids, such as tryptophan
and cysteine, but is rich in hydroxylysine and hydroxyproline. There are
fi ve main types of collagen in the human body. Their common
distribution is as follows:
Type I: bone, skin, tendon, uterus, arteries
Type II: hyaline cartilage, eye tissues
Type III: skin, arteries, uterus, and bowel wall
Type IV: basement membrane
Type V: basement membrane and other tissues
The normal ratio of type I to type III collagen in the skin is approximately
4:1.


Which among the following statements regarding the functions of the
extraocular muscles is incorrect?
A. The inferior oblique muscle abducts the eye and moves it upwards
B. The superior rectus muscle abducts the eyes and moves it laterally
C. The superior oblique muscle abducts the eye and moves it
downwards
D. The medial rectus muscle moves the eye medially
E. The inferior rectus muscle adducts the eye and moves it downwards
ANSWER IS B
There are six extraocular muscles which act to rotate an eye about its
vertical, horizontal, and anteroposterior axes. They are the inferior
oblique, and the superior oblique, the medial rectus, the lateral rectus,
the superior rectus, the inferior rectus. The inferior oblique abducts the
eye and moves it upwards; the superior oblique abducts the eye and
moves the eye downwards; the medial rectus moves the eye medially;
the lateral rectus moves the eye laterally; the superior rectus primarily
adducts the eyes and moves it upwards (not abduct the eye and move it
later-ally); and the inferior rectus adducts the eye and moves it
downwards.


Which of following substances is a vasodilator?
A Angiotensin II
B Nitric oxide

294
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


C Noradrenaline
D Vasopressin
E Thromboxane A2


ANSWER IS B
The importance of endothelium in vascular responses was first noted
when it was discovered that removing the endothelium from perfused
arteries prevented the vasodilator action of acetylcholine on those
vessels. The endothelium-derived relaxing factor has since been
recognized as nitric oxide (a vasodilator). Vasopressin, angiotensin II,
thromboxane A2 and noradrenaline are all vasoconstrictors.
Since its discovery, nitric oxide has been implicated in a diverse array of
different biological processes, both physiological and pathological,
besides vasodilatation, including:
acting as a neurotransmitter
the killing of microorganisms by phagocytes
long-term potentiation (memory)
male erection (Viagra enhances the effect of nitric oxide)
sepsis
excitotoxicity.
In addition, nitric oxide explains how glyceryl trinitrate exerts its
beneficial effect in angina. More and more is being discovered about
nitric oxide all the time.


With regard to extra-ocular muscles:
A Superior rectus is supplied by the trochlear nerve
B Levator palpebrae superioris is supplied solely by the occulomotor
nerve
C The superior oblique muscle is innervated by the occulomotor nerve
D Lateral rectus is supplied by the abducens nerve
E The inferior oblique muscle moves the eye inferiorly


ANSWER IS D
The extra-ocular muscles are innervated by the 3rd (occulomotor), 4th
(trochlear) and 6th (abducens) cranial nerves. The trochlear nerve
supplies only one muscle and that is the superior oblique muscle. The

295
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


abducens nerve also supplies only one muscle and that is the lateral
rectus muscle. This may be remembered by ‘S04, LR6’. All the
remaining muscles are supplied by the occulomotor nerve – that is, the
superior rectus, inferior rectus, inferior oblique and medial rectus are all
supplied by the occulomotor, or 3rd, cranial nerve. Injury to any of these
cranial nerves (3rd, 4th or 6th) may result in ophthalmoplegia and double
vision (diplopia).
The recti muscles are easily understood as they move the eyeball in the
respective directions indicated by their name. The superior and inferior
obliques are more difficult to understand. The superior oblique muscle
moves the cornea downwards and outwards, whereas the inferior
oblique muscle moves the cornea upwards and inwards. The reason for
this is that the oblique muscles pass posteriorly to attach behind the axis
of movement and therefore impart movement opposite to their
suggested names. Weakness of the extra-ocular muscles may occur in
the autoimmune condition, myasthenia gravis.
The levator palpebrae superioris is the exception to the above. It
elevates the eyelid but has a dual innervation from both the occulomotor
nerve and sympathetic fibres. The latter innervate a small smooth
muscle portion of the levator muscle known as Muller’s muscle. The
clinical significance of this dual innervation is that a 3rd cranial nerve
(occulomotor) palsy, or sympathetic interruption (Horner’s syndrome),
may result in a droopy eyelid (ptosis). To distinguish the two it is
essential to lift up the eyelid and inspect the pupil to see if it is enlarged
(mydriasis, in an occulomotor nerve palsy) or constricted (miosis, in a
Horner’s syndrome). Furthermore, in an occulomotor palsy the eyeball
points downwards and outwards from the unopposed action of superior
oblique and lateral rectus, supplied by the 4th and 6th cranial nerves.
Horner’s syndrome is associated with hemifacial anhidrosis (absent
sweating of the ipsilateral face), flushing symptoms (the so-called
Harlequin syndrome or effect) and enophthalmos (a sunken eyeball), in
addition to ptosis and miosis.


Hodgkin’s lymphoma can be distinguished from other forms of
lymphoma by the presence of:
A Reed–Sternberg cells
B Philadelphia chromosome
C Auer rods


296
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


D Decreased quantities of leukocyte alkaline phosphatase
E Pappenheimer bodies




ANSWER IS A
Reed–Sternberg cells are diagnostic for Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The
Philadelphia chromosome and decreased quantities of leucocytes
alkaline phosphatase are commonly observed in chronic myelogenous
leukaemia. Auer rods are most often seen in increased numbers in acute
myelogenous or myelonocytic leukaemia. Pappenheimer bodies are
abnormal iron granules found inside red blood cells. They are associated
with sideroblastic anaemia, haemolytic anaemia, and sickle cell disease.


A total of 100 hypertensive patients are followed over a 4-week period
for the effects of a diuretic drug on potassium concentrations. The
statistical test used to compare the potassium serum levels before and
after medication is most likely to be:
A Discriminant analysis
B Paired t-test
C Regression analysis
D Pearson correlation
E Chi-squared test


ANSWER IS B
A paired t-test allows a comparison of mean potassium values before
and after treatment by comparing each patient’s initial serum level with
his or her repeat value.


With regard to the Palatine tonsil:
A It lies on the middle pharyngeal constrictor muscle
B It is supplied by the superior pharyngeal artery
C It is lined by columnar epithelium
D Inflammation may cause referred pain to the ear
E Bleeding after tonsillectomy is usually due to arterial bleeding


297
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A




ANSWER IS D
The palatine tonsils (‘tonsils’) are a large collection of lymphoid tissue
that project into the oropharynx from the tonsillar fossa, between the
palatoglossal arch (in front) and the palatopharyngeal arch (behind).
They are most prominent in early life and regress in later years as the
lymphoid tissue atrophies. The surface marking is medial to the lower
masseter. The palatine, lingual, pharyngeal (‘adenoids’) and tubal tonsils
collectively form an interrupted circle of protective lymphoid tissue at the
upper end of the respiratory and alimentary tracts known as Waldeyer’s
ring. This area has a role in the priming of lymphocytes for antigens
during the early years of life.
The floor of the tonsillar fossa (lateral wall) is the lower part of the
superior constrictor, with styloglossus on its lateral side. The luminal
surface of the tonsil is covered by non-keratinized stratified squamous
epithelium which deeply invaginates the tonsil forming blind-ended
tonsillar crypts. The tonsillar branch of the facial artery (in turn a branch
of the external carotid artery) forms the main arterial supply. It enters the
tonsil by piercing the superior constrictor.
The main function of the tonsils is immunological, especially within the
early years of life. Since they harbour microbes, this makes them
vulnerable to infection and inflammation (tonsillitis). Lymphatic channels
pierce the superior constrictor to reach the deep cervical nodes,
especially the jugulodigastric (or tonsillar) node below the angle of the
mandible. This is the lymph node that is most commonly enlarged in
tonsillitis (jugulodigastric lymphadenopathy). The mucous membrane
overlying the tonsil is supplied mainly by the tonsillar branch of the
glossopharyngeal nerve. The glossopharyngeal nerve also supplies the
middle ear through its tympanic branch. This explains why tonsillitis
commonly causes referred pain to the middle ear. Ear pain may also
feature in the early postoperative period after tonsillectomy.
Tonsillectomy (removal of the tonsils) is indicated for recurrent episodes
of tonsillitis or obstructive sleep apnoea. Removal does not appear to
compromise immune function. The main complication after tonsillectomy
is haemorrhage and the usual cause is venous, rather than arterial
bleeding, from the external palatine, or paratonsillar, vein. The close
proximity of the internal carotid artery (which lies 2.5 cm posterolateral)
to the palatine tonsil must be borne in mind at tonsillectomy in order to
prevent inadvertent injury.

298
                                                            MCQS MRCS-A




Autoimmune diseases:
A Are usually congenital
B Are overall more common in men than in women
C Arise when an immune response is mounted against a foreign
antigen
D Result from a breakdown in immunological tolerance
E Are always humoral-mediated


ANSWER IS D
Autoimmune diseases result from the direct attack by the host immune
system against its own, or self, antigens (autoantigens), usually as a
result of a breakdown in immunological tolerance. They are normally
acquired, rather than congenital, and for some unknown reason they are
more common in women than men. The female preponderance is often
taken to imply that sex hormones are involved in the pathogenesis. It is
still unclear as to the exact nature of the stimulus that triggers an
autoimmune reaction. The most plausible explanation is that certain
exogenous agents (such as a dietary factors, drugs or microbial agents),
that share epitopes with self-antigens, stimulate an immune response
against both themselves and the host tissues, producing tissue-
damaging reactions. This is known as ‘molecular mimicry’. However,
genetic factors undoubtedly also play a role. For instance, autoimmune
diseases are often associated with specific HLA types.
Although in many cases the precise combination of pathogenic
mechanisms is not understood, either antibody or T-cells can cause
tissue damage in autoimmune disease.


Hyperacute rejection:
A Is a cell-mediated response
B Occurs 48 hours after transplantation
C Can occur in autografts
D May be reversed by high-dose steroids
E May be minimized by blood-group matching


ANSWER IS E

299
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Hyperacute rejection is due to the formation of preformed antibodies
against the donor organ. It occurs within minutes of transplantation so
the surgeon can usually see the changes taking place as the
anastomoses are completed.
The antibodies are usually directed against blood group antigens and it
can therefore be minimized by blood-group matching. The blood groups
and HLA antigens of autografts (tissue from the same individual) will be
identical, so hyperacute rejection will never occur in such circumstances.
No drug treatment can reverse hyperacute rejection; the main treatment
is removal of the transplanted organ.
Transplant rejections can be classified into the following types:
hyperacute – preformed antibodies (minutes–hours) accelerated acute –
reactivation of sensitized T-cells and secondary antibody response
(days)
acute –cytotoxic T-cell mediated with primary activation of T-cells (days
to weeks)
chronic – antibody-mediated vascular damage (months to years,
controversial).


A disease inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder:
A Requires that both parents carry the abnormality
B Usually prevents reproduction
C Affects males and females equally
D Affects all the children of the affected adult
E May be transmitted by a carrier who does not manifest the disease
ANSWER IS C
Autosomal dominant disorders affect males and females equally since
there is no involvement of the sex chromosomes and autosomes are
similar for males and females. Only one of the parents need carry the
abnormality for it to be classified as an autosomal dominant disorder; if
both parents were required to carry the abnormality it would be an
autosomal recessive disorder.
Only half the children of an affected adult would inherit the condition
since half would receive the normal autosome. Carriers of an autosomal
dominant trait do not exist; carriers of a dominant character exhibit the
disease.
Autosomal dominant conditions are commonly transmitted from one
generation to the next, either because of their late onset (e.g.

300
                                                                        MCQS MRCS-A


Huntington’s disease), or because reproduction occurs before death
ensues.


Gene transcription is initiated by:
A Exons
B Promoters
C Silencers
D Introns
E Enhancers


ANSWER IS B
Transcription of genes is initiated by promoters. Enhancers and
silencers are proteins that bind to the promoter region on the DNA and
will influence gene transcription. Exons carry the coding sequences of
DNA.


000------------------------------------00000000-----------------------------------000




301
      MCQS MRCS-A




302
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


A 43 year old lady presents with severe chest pain. Investigations
demonstrate a dissecting aneurysm of the ascending aorta which
originates at the aortic valve. What is the optimal long term treatment?
Endovascular stent
Medical therapy with beta blockers
Medical therapy with ACE inhibitors
Sutured aortic repair
Aortic root replacement

ANSWER IS E
Proximal aortic dissections are generally managed with surgical aortic
root replacement. The proximal origin of the dissection together with
chest pain (which may occur in all types of aortic dissection) raises
concerns about the possibility of coronary ostial involvement (which
precludes stenting). There is no role for attempted suture repair in this
situation.

A 56 year old man is investigated for anaemia and a large exophytic
growth is identified in the distal stomach. What pathological finding is
most likely?
Squamous cell carcinoma
Adenocarcinoma
Lymphoma
Leiomyosarcoma
Rhadomyosarcoma

ANSWER IS B
Most gastric malignancies are adenocarcinomas

A 45 year old lady presents with a pathological fracture of her femoral
shaft. She is a poor historian, but it transpires that she underwent a
thyroidectomy 1 year previously. She has no other illness or co-
morbidities. What is the most likely underlying diagnosis?
Hyperparathyroidism
Metastatic papillary carcinoma of the thyroid
Metastatic medullary carcinoma of the thyroid
Metastatic follicular carcinoma of the thyroid
None of the above


303
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS D
Follicular carcinomas are a recognised cause of bone metastasis.
Papillary lesions typically spread via the lymphatics.

A 55 year old lady presents with discomfort in the right breast. On
clinical examination a small lesion is identified and clinical appearances
suggest fibroadenoma. Imaging confirms the presence of a
fibroadenoma alone. A core biopsy is taken, this confirms the presence
of the fibroadenoma. However, the pathologist notices that a small area
of lobular carcinoma in situ is also present in the biopsy. What is the
best management?
Whole breast irradiation
Simple mastectomy
Mastectomy and sentinal lymph node biopsy
Wide local excision and sentinel lymph node biopsy
Breast MRI scan

ANSWER IS E

 Lobular carcinoma in situ has a low association with invasive
malignancy. It is seldom associated with microcalcification and therefore
MRI is the best tool for determining disease extent. Resection of in situ
disease is not generally recommended and most surgeons would simply
pursue a policy of close clinical and radiological follow up.

A 78 year old man presents with symptoms of headaches and
deteriorating vision. He notices that there is marked pain on the right
hand side of his face when he combs his hair. What is the most likely
diagnosis?
Giant cell arteritis
Wegeners granulomatosis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Takayasu's arteritis
Buergers disease

ANSWER IS A
Temporal arteritis may present acutely with symptoms of headache and
visual loss, or with a less acute clinical picture. Sight may be threatened
and treatment with immunosuppressants should be started promptly.

304
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


The often requested temporal artery biopsy (which can be the bane of
many surgeons) is often non diagnostic and unhelpful.

Which one of the following may be associated with an increased risk of
venous thromboembolism?
Diabetes
Cannula
Hyperthyroidism
Tamoxifen
Amiodarone

ANSWER IS D
Consider thromboembolism in breast cancer patients on tamoxifen!

A 42 year old lady is investigated for symptoms of irritability and altered
bowel habit. On examination she is noted to have a smooth enlargement
of the thyroid gland. As part of her investigations thyroid function tests
are requested, these are as follows:
TSH 0.1 mug/l
Free T4 35 pmol/l
The most likely underlying diagnosis is:
Multinodular goitre
Follicular carcinoma of the thyroid gland
Graves disease
Pregnancy
None of the above

ANSWER IS C
TSH receptor antibodies will cause stimulation of the thyroid to
synthesise T4. However, this will have a negative feedback effect on the
pituitary causing decrease in TSH levels.
Where hyperthyroidism occurs secondary to pregnancy the TSH is
typically elevated.



Which of the following is not a risk factor for developing tuberculosis?
Gastrectomy
Solid organ transplantation with immunosupression

305
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


Intravenous drug use
Haematological malignancy
Amiodarone

ANSWER IS E
Risk factors for developing active tuberculosis include:
silicosis
chronic renal failure
HIV positive
solid organ transplantation with immunosuppression
intravenous drug use
haematological malignancy
anti-TNF treatment
previous gastrectomy

A 75 year old lady is investigated for episodes of painless haematuria.
Apart from COPD from long term smoking she is otherwise well. She has
no other urinary symptoms. What is the most likely cause?
Transitional cell bladder cancer
Squamous cell bladder cancer
Adenocarcinoma of the bladder
Stone disease
Arteriovenous malformation of the bladder

ANSWER IS A
TCC commonly presents with painless haematuria that may be detected
during testing carried out for other reasons. Bladder AVM are very rare

A 2 week infant has foul smelling material discharging from the
umbilicus. What is the underlying problem?
High enterocutaneous fistula
Low enterocutaneous fistula
Entero-enteric fistula
Colo-cutaneous fistula
Vesico cutaneous fistula

ANSWER IS B



306
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


This baby has an enterocutaneous fistula at the umbilicus due to
complete failure of the omphalomesenteric duct to obliterate. This is
treated with resection

Which of the following is not true of gastric cancer?
There is an association with blood group A
Adenocarcinoma is the most common subtype
Individuals with histological evidence of signet ring cells have a lower
incidence of lymph node metastasis
Lymphomas account for 5% cases
In Western Countries a more proximal disease distribution has been
noted
ANSWER IS C
Signet ring cells are features of poorly differentiated gastric cancer
associated with a increased risk of metastatic disease.

What is the most common presentation of a parotid gland tumour?
Parapharyngeal mass
Mass at anterior border of masseter
Mass inferior to the angle of the mandible
Mass behind the angle of the mandible
Mass anterior to the ear

ANSWER IS D
Parotid tumours may present at any region in the gland. However, most
lesions will be located behind the angle of the mandible, inferior to the
ear lobe. Tumours of the deep lobe of the parotid may present as a
parapharyngeal mass and large lesions may displace the tonsil
A 52 year old male is referred to urology clinic with impotence. He is
known to have hypertension. He does not have any morning erections.
On further questioning the patient reports pain in his buttocks, this
worsens on mobilising. On examination there is some muscle atrophy.
The penis and scrotum are normal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Leriche syndrome
S3-S4 cord lesion
Pudendal nerve lesion
Psychological impotence
Beta blocker induced impotence


307
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS A
Leriche syndrome

Classically, it is described in male patients as a triad of symptoms:

1. Claudication of the buttocks and thighs
2. Atrophy of the musculature of the legs
3. Impotence (due to paralysis of the L1 nerve)
Leriche syndrome, is atherosclerotic occlusive disease involving the
abdominal aorta and/or both of the iliac arteries. Management involves
correcting underlying risk factors such as hypercholesterolaemia and
stopping smoking. Investigation is usually with angiography.

A patient presents with a facial nerve palsy. This occurred following
repeat excision of a facial lump. The histology report remarks on the
biphasic appearance of the lesion and mucinous connective tissue.
What is the most likely underlying lesion?
Pleomorphic adenoma
Adenolymphoma
Anaplastic carcinoma
Adenoid cystic carcinoma
Schwannoma

ANSWER IS A
The histological features are as described with a classic biphasic (mixed
stromal and epithelial elements), although benign local recurrence can
complicate incomplete excision. As this is a benign lesion direct
extension into the facial nerve is unlikely to occur. Facial nerve injury
can happen during repeat parotid surgery

A 23 year old man presents with diarrhoea and passage of mucous. He
is suspected of having ulcerative colitis. Which of the following is least
likely to be associated with this condition?
Superficial mucosal inflammation in the colon
Significant risk of dysplasia in long standing disease
Epsiodes of large bowel obstruction during acute attacks
Haemorrhage
Disease sparing the anal canal



308
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS C
 Large bowel obstruction is not a feature of UC, patients may develop
megacolon. However, this is a different entity both diagnostically and
clinically. Ulcerative colitis does not affect the anal canal and the anal
transitional zone. Inflammation is superficial. Dysplasia can occur in 2%
overall, but increases significantly if disease has been present over 20
years duration. Granulomas are features of crohn's disease.

Other features:
Disease maximal in the rectum and may spread proximally
Contact bleeding
Longstanding UC crypt atrophy and metaplasia/dysplasia

A 23 year old lady undergoes a total thyroidectomy as treatment for a
papillary carcinoma of the thyroid. The pathologist examines histological
sections of the thyroid gland and identifies a psammoma body. What are
these primarily composed of?
Clusters of calcification
Aggregations of neutrophils
Aggregations of macrophages
Giant cells surrounding the tumour
Clusters of oxalate crystals

ANSWER IS A
Psammoma bodies consist of clusters of microcalcification. They are
most commonly seen in papillary carcinomas.

A 52 year old woman attends clinic for investigation of abdominal pain
and constipation. On examination you note blue lines on the gum
margin. She mentions that her legs have become weak in the past few
days. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Acute intermittent porphyria
Lead poisoning
Constipation
Guillan Barre syndrome
Rectal carcinoma

ANSWER IS B


309
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


This would be an impressive diagnosis to make in the surgical out
patient department! The combination of abdominal pain and a motor
periperal neuropathy, should indicate this diagnosis. The blue line along
the gum margin can occur in up to 20% patients with lead poisoning.

A 28 year old man presents with right upper quadrant pain and hydatid
disease is suspected. Which of the following statements relating to the
disease is untrue?
First line treatment is with pentavalent antimony.
Peritoneal contamination with active daughter cysts may complicate
surgery.
CT scanning of the liver may show a floating membrane.
Biliary communication with the cysts may occur.
It is caused by Echinococcus granulosus.

ANSWER IS A
Drug treatment is with albendazole or mebendazole. Praziquantzel may
be used in the pre operative stages.

Which of the following statements relating to abnormal coagulation is
false?
Warfarin affects the synthesis of factor 2,7,9,10
The prothrombin time is prolonged in Haemophilia A
Cholestatic jaundice can cause vitamin K deficiency
Disseminated intravascular coagulation is associated with
thrombocytopenia
Massive transfusion is associated with reduced levels of factor 5 and 8

ANSWER IS B
In haemophilia A the APTT is prolonged and there is reduced levels of
factor 8:C. The bleeding time and PT are normal. Cholestatic jaundice
prevents the absorption of the fat soluble vitamin K. Massive transfusion
(>10u blood or equivalent to the blood volume of a person) puts the
patient at risk of thrombocytopaenia, factor 5 and 8 deficiency.

A 34 year old man presents with a peptic ulcer. Which of the following is
responsible for the release of gastric acid?
Chief cells
Parietal cells
310
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Brunners Glands
G Cells
None of the above

ANSWER IS B
Parietal cells are responsible for the release of gastric acid. Brunners
glands are found in the duodenum.

Which of the following does not lead to relaxation of the lower
oesophageal sphincter?
Metoclopramide
Botulinum toxin type A
Nicotine
Alcohol
Theophylline

ANSWER IS A
Metoclopramide acts directly on the smooth muscle of the LOS to cause
it to contract.
Theophylline is a phosphodiesterase inhibitor (mimics action of
prostaglandin E1) which causes relaxation of the LOS.

Which of the following is not released from the islets of Langerhans?
Pancreatic polypeptide
Glucagon
Secretin
Somatostatin
Insulin

ANSWER IS C
Secretin is released from mucosal cells in the duodenum and jejunum.

Which of the following is not classically seen in coning resulting from
raised intra cranial pressure?
Coma
Hypotension
Unreactive mid sized pupils


311
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Cheyne Stokes style respiratory efforts
Bradycardia

ANSWER IS B
Cushings triad
Widening of the pulse pressure
Respiratory changes
Bradycardia
Due to raised ICP systemic hypertension is usually seen. Compression
of the respiratory centre will typically result in Cheyne Stokes style
respiration.

Control of ventilation. Which statement is false?
Peripheral chemoreceptors are located in the bifurcation of the carotid
arteries and arch of the aorta
Central chemoreceptors respond to changes in O2
The respiratory centres control the rate and depth of respiration
Involuntary control of respiration is from the medulla and pons
Irritant receptors cause bronchospasm

ANSWER IS B
Central chemoreceptors: Respond to increased H+ in BRAIN
INTERSTITIAL FLUID to increase ventilation.

A 54 year old lady has her serum calcium measured. Assuming her
renal function is normal, what proportion of calcium filtered at the
glomerulus will be reabsorbed by the renal tubules?
5%
15%
25%
50%
95%

ANSWER IS E
Most filtered calcium is reabsorbed (95%) a rare disorder of familial
hypocalcemic calciurea may affect this proportion.

Which of the following does not cause hyperkalaemia?

312
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Haemolysis
Burns
Familial periodic paralysis
Type 4 renal tubular acidosis
Severe malnutrition
ANSWER IS E
'Machine' - Causes of Increased Serum K+

M - Medications - ACE inhibitors, NSAIDS
A - Acidosis - Metabolic and respiratory
C - Cellular destruction - Burns, traumatic injury
H - Hypoaldosteronism, haemolysis
I - Intake - Excessive
N - Nephrons, renal failure
E - Excretion - Impaired

Familial periodic paralysis has subtypes associated with hyper and
hypokalaemia.

Which of the following statements is true of glucagon?
Produced in response to hyperglycaemia
Released by beta cells
Inhibits gluconeogenesis
Produced in response to an increase of amino acids
Composed of 2 alpha polypeptide chains linked by hydrogen bonds

ANSWER IS D
Glucagon is a protein comprised of a single polypeptide chain.
Produced by alpha cells of pancreatic islets of Langerhans in response
to hypoglycaemia and amino acids.
It increases plasma glucose and ketones.

A 52 year old man develops septic shock following a Hartmans
procedure for perforated diverticular disease. He is started on an
adrenaline infusion. Which of the following is least likely to occur?
Peripheral vasoconstriction
Coronary artery vasospasm
Gluconeogenesis
Lipolysis
Tachycardia
313
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A



ANSWER IS B
It's cardiac effects are mediated via β 1 receptors. The coronary arteries
which have β 2 receptors are unaffected.

Intra cranial pressure is governed by the principles of the Monroe-Kellie
doctrine. To which of the following does this concept not apply?
A 2 month old child
A 2 year old child
A 5 year old child
A 10 year old child
An adult

ANSWER IS A
The Monroe-Kelly Doctrine assumes that the cranial cavity is a rigid box.
In children with non fused fontanells this is not the case.



Which of the following is not caused by cortisol in the stress response?
Anti-inflammatory effects
Hypoglycaemia
Skeletal muscle protein breakdown
Stimulation of lipolysis
Mineralocorticoid effects

ANSWER IS B
An 'anti insulin' effect occurs leading to hyperglycaemia.

Which of the following features does not put a patient at risk of refeeding
syndrome?
BMI < 16 kg/m2
Alcohol abuse
Thyrotoxicosis
Chemotherapy
Diuretics

ANSWER IS C

314
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Diuretics increase the risk of re-feeding syndrome through a process of
increasing the risk of depletion of key electrolytes.

Which of the following statements relating to the regulation of renal
blood flow is untrue?
In a healthy 70Kg male, the glomerular filtration rate will be the same at
a systolic blood pressure of 120mmHg as a systolic blood pressure of 95
mmHg
Over 90% of the blood supply to the kidney is distributed to the cortex
The kidney receives approximately 25% of the total cardiac output at
rest
A decrease in renal perfusion pressure will cause the juxtaglomerular
cells to secrete renin
Systolic blood pressures of less than 65mmHg will cause the mesangial
cells to secrete aldosterone

ANSWER IS E
The kidney autoregulates its blood supply over a range of systolic blood
pressures. Drop in arterial pressure is sensed by the juxtaglomerular
cells and renin is released leading to the activation of the renin-
angiontensin system. Mesangial cells are contractile cells that are
located in the tubule and have no direct endocrine function.

A 39 year old lady undergoes a laparoscopic cholecystectomy as a
daycase. The operation is more difficult than anticipated and the
surgeon places a drain to the liver bed. In recovery 1.5 litres of blood is
seen to enter the drain. Which of the following substances is the first to
be released in this situation?
Angiotensinogen
Renin
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
Aldosterone

ANSWER IS B
The decrease in blood pressure will be sensed by the juxtaglomerular
cells in the kidney. This will cause renin secretion.

Which of the following drugs causes hyperkalaemia?

315
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


Heparin
Ciprofloxacin
Salbutamol
Levothyroxine
Codeine phosphate

ANSWER IS A
Both unfractionated and low-molecular weight heparin can cause
hyperkalaemia. This is thought to be caused by inhibition of aldosterone
secretion. Salbutamol is a recognised treatment for hyperkalaemia.

A 25-year-old man who has been morbidly obese for the past five years
is reviewed in the surgical bariatric clinic. In this patient, release of which
of the following hormones would increase appetite?
Leptin
Thyroxine
Adiponectin
Ghrelin
Serotonin

 ANSWER IS D
Obesity hormones
leptin decreases appetite
ghrelin increases appetite
Whilst thyroxine can increase appetite it does not fit with the clinical
picture being described.

Which of the following is not linked to excess glucocorticoids?
Osteonecrosis
Osteoporosis
Hypokalaemia
Hyponatraemia
Growth retardation in children

ANSWER IS D
There are many adverse effects associated with excess glucocorticoids.
Thinning of the skin, osteonecrosis and osteoporosis are all common.
Steroids are associated with retention of sodium and water. Potassium
loss may occur and hypokalaemic alkalosis has been reported.
316
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A



A 54-year-old woman is admitted to the Surgical Admissions Unit with
abdominal pain. Blood tests taken on admission show the following:
Magnesium 0.40 mmol/l (normal value 0.7-1.0 mmol/l)
Which one of the following factors is most likely to be responsible for this
result?
Excessive resuscitation with intravenous saline
Digoxin therapy
Diarrhoea
Hypothermia
Rhabdomyolysis

ANSWER IS C

A 43 year old man has a nasogastric tube inserted. The nurse takes a
small aspirate of the fluid from the stomach and tests the pH of the
aspirate. What is the normal intragastric pH?
0.5
2
4
5
6

ANSWER IS B
The intragastric pH is usually 2. Administration of proton pump inhibitors
can result in almost complete abolition of acidity

A 33 year old female is admitted for varicose vein surgery. She is fit and
well. After the procedure she is persistently bleeding. She is known to
have menorrhagia. Investigations show a prolonged bleeding time and
increased APTT. She has a normal PT and platelet count. What is the
most likely cause?
Anti phospholipid syndrome
Haemophilia
Factor V Leiden deficiency
von Willebrands disease
Protein C and S deficiency



317
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS D
Bleeding post operatively, epistaxis and menorrhagia may indicate a
diagnosis of vWD. Haemoarthroses are rare. The bleeding time is
usually normal in haemophilia (X-linked) and vitamin K deficiency.

Which of the following is the equivalent of cardiac preload?

End diastolic volume
Stroke volume
Systemic vascular resistance
Mean arterial pressure
Peak systolic arterial pressure
ANSWER IS A
Preload is the same as end diastolic volume. When it is increased
slightly there is an associated increase in cardiac output (Frank Starling
principle). When it is markedly increased e.g. over 250ml then cardiac
output falls.

An elderly gentleman presents to your clinic with progressive weight
loss, dysphagia and several episodes of haemetamesis. An upper
gastrointestinal endoscopy reveals a fungating growth in his distal
oesophagus. Which of the following statements is correct regarding
oesophageal carcinoma? Select one answer only.
A. The pathology of this lesion is most likely to be a squamous cell
carcinoma
B. Adenocarcinomas of the oesophagus are commoner than squamous
cell carcinomas
C. Tobacco smoking has been linked to both squamous and adeno-
carcinomas of the oesophagus
D. Squamous cell carcinoma is associated with Barrett’s oesophagus
E. The majority of oesophageal cancers can be treated by EMR
(endoscopic mucosal resection).

ANSWER IS C
Oesophageal carcinoma is divided into adenocarcinoma which affects
the distal 1/3 (50-80%) and squamous cell carcinomas (90-95%) which
affect the upper 2/3. Squamous cell carcinomas are associated with
tobacco (as is adenocarcinoma) and also alcohol intake whereas
adenocarcinoma is closely linked to gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
and Barrett‟s oesophagus. The majority of oesophageal cancers present
318
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


late and therefore are not suitable for minimally invasive surgery. Sadly
palliation is often the only treatment available.

You are seeing a patient in the joint oncology clinic who is about to start
a course of radiotherapy for adjuvant treatment of breast cancer. Whilst
waiting for the oncologist she asks you questions regarding radiotherapy
as a general principle. Which of the following statements is correct
regarding radiotherapy? Select one answer only.
A. In the context of breast cancer radiotherapy is given following surgery
to complete the local treatment before chemotherapy is prescribed if
needed
B. Radiotherapy works to induce local damage and thereby induce
macrophages and natural killer cells who effect tumour regression
C. Brachytherapy is a slow duration method of administering
radiotherapy for patients who have significant e.g pulmonary pathology
and therefore need a more gentle regimen
D. Temporary tattoos are placed as part of planning to guide bean
placement during treatment
E. The major side effect of radiotherapy is lethargy and skin reactions.

ANSWER IS E
Radiotherapy works by damaging the DNA of exposed tissue leading to
cell death. The effect is either direct or indirect ionization of the atoms
which make up the DNA chain. Indirect ionization happens as a result of
the ionization of water forming free radicals, notably hydroxyl radicals
which then damage the DNA. It spares adjacent tissue by using shaped
beams which are designed during planning which intersect to give a
large absorbed dose in the area of interest. The beams are kept
constant over treatments by using permanent tattoos which ensure
standardisation. Brachytherapy is used to deliver a rapid high local dose
of radiation as in cervical or prostatic carcinoma. Following breast
cancer surgery, the order of treatment assuming all are needed is
chemotherapy then radiotherapy + hormone treatment.

Your team has recently performed a right mastectomy and level 3
axillary node clearance for a 43year-old lady. Histology reveals a 43 mm
grade 3 carcinoma with 13/15 nodes positive. The tumor is ER/PR/Her-2
positive. Following discussion at the MDT she has been recommended
for radiotherapy, chemotherapy, Herceptin and endocrine manipulation
in due course. Which of the following statements is true regarding
chemotherapy? Select one answer only.

319
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A. Herceptin is a monoclonal antibody immunotherapy directed against
the IGFR-3 receptor which is found in 25-30% of breast cancers
B. Chemotherapy should be prescribed and delivered exclusively by
oncologists
C. Alkylating agents bind covalently to DNA and act by inducing
apoptosis if the cell attempts to divide or repair itself
D. Anti-metabolites promote the production of anti-metabolic enzymes
which act preferentially on rapidly dividing cells (ie cancer)
E. Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy can be given to consolidate primary
surgical treatment.

ANSWER IS C
Herceptin is a monoclonal antibody against the HER-2 receptor
otherwise known as he EGRF-2 receptor. This is found on 25-30% of
breast cancer cells and is a poor prognostic marker. Chemotherapy
when in the context of cancer should be delivered by oncologists but can
also be active against a variety of other conditions if sufficiently
aggressive/severe. These include psoriasis, arthritis, multiple sclerosis,
Crohns disease and SLE. In these contexts they would be delivered by
the appropriate clinician. There are several different classes of
chemotherapeutic agents for example alkylating agents, anti-
metabolites, antimicrotubule agents, Topoisomerase inhibitors and
cytotoxic antibiotics. The anti-metabolites have a similar structure to
purines and pyramidines and impede DNA/RNA synthesis. They prevent
mitosis and induce apoptosis. Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy is given prior
to local therapy eg surgery to shrink the tumour or in cases where
micrometastasis is likely.

You have been referred an 85-year-old man by the dermatology
department with an large ulcerated lesion on his vertex. It has obviously
been there some time and is now painful and bleeding. Further testing
confirms a basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Which of the following
statements is true of BCC? Select one answer only.
A. They exert their clinical effects mainly by their high frequency of
metastatic spread
B. They classically present with a large ulcerated area on sun exposed
skin – the ‘Rodent Ulcer’
C. They are found on sun exposed areas in all cases
D. The treatment of choice is surgical excision
E. They have a worse prognosis than squamous cell carcinomas.



320
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS D
BCC is the commonest type of cutaneous cancer and affects
approximately 30% of all Caucasian Americans in their lifetime with the
majority (80%) being on the head and neck. They usually present as
raised pearly nodules with telangiectasia rather than the less common
“Rodent ulcer”. Although frequent, they are the least concerning of the
skin cancers, rarely showing metastatic spread and usually exert their
influence by local destruction if left untreated. Although the vast majority
(2/3) are found on sun exposed areas, 1/3 do not, emphasising the
genetic link. Surgery with an appropriate margin is the treatment of
choice although chemotherapy, immunotherapy and radiation therapy
are also used.

You see a 78-year-old lady in the breast clinic who presents with a large
fungating mass in her right breast. She is confined to a wheelchair due
to severe respiratory and cardiac disease and has 3 pillow paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnoea. Following discussion with your consultant you start
her on anastrazole 1mg od. Which one of the following statements is
true regarding ER +ve breast cancers? Select one answer only.
A. Anastrazole is an appropriate treatment choice in the adjuvant setting
for node positive high risk premenopausal breast cancers
B. Anastrazole is recommended in the adjuvant setting for post-
menopausal breast cancers for 10 years
C. Tamoxifen increases the risk of endometrial carcinoma from 1:1000
to 2:100
D. Tamoxifen lowers the HDL:LDL cholesterol ratio
E. Approximately 90% of breast cancers in post-menopausal women are
ER +ve.

ANSWER IS C
Aromatase inhibitors are used to treat ER +vepost menopausal breast
cancers in the neo-adjuvant or adjuvant settings, which makes up
approximately 2/3 of cancers in this age group. They are of no value in
pre-menopausal women as in these patients the vast majority of
oestrogen comes from the ovaries and reducing peripheral production by
anastrazole would cause a reflex increase in the amount produced by
this source because of the negative feedback mechanism. The current
recommendation is for 5 years of adjuvant aromatase inhibitor and they
increase the HDL:LDLraio and as such are cardioprotective.




321
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A 45-year-old woman has recently been diagnosed with a palpable node
positive breast cancer initially treated by a wide local excision and
axillary clearance. Her tumour is 26 mm, grade 3 with 3/19 nodes
positive. Her pre chemotherapy staging scans (CT and bone scan) show
indeterminate lung nodules. She is enquiring about her prognosis and
rationale for adjuvant therapy. What is her NPI (Nottingham prognostic
index)? Select one answer only.
A. 2.43
B. 3.54
C. 4.56
D. 5.52
E. 6.36

ANSWER IS D
The Nottingham prognostic index gives a numerical score to individual
breast cancers and can act as a guide for the need for chemotherapy
and give patients prognostic information which they can understand. It
divides cancers into 5 prognostic groups. It is calculated from size in cm
(x 0.2) + grade (13) + number of involved lymph nodes (0=1, 1-3=2,
>3=3).

A 69-year-old man presents with a history of weight loss, altered bowel
habit and feeling generally unwell. Investigations reveal a caecal
carcinoma. He undergoes a right hemicolectomy. Histology reveals a
large tumour which has extended through the muscularis propria but
spared the lymph nodes. The patient has tried to read up on his disease
from the internet and asks you which 'Dukes' staging this represents?
Select one answer only.
A. Dukes A
B. Dukes B
C. Dukes C1
D. Dukes C2
E. Dukes D

ANSWER IS B
The original staging system derived by Cuthbert Dukes was:
1. Invasion into but not through the bowel wall (90% 5yr survival)
2. Invasion through the bowel wall but not involving lymph nodes (70%
5yr survival)
3. Involvement of lymph nodes (30% 5y survival)
4. Distant metastases.

322
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A



This was revised by Astler-Coller in 1954:
A Limited to mucosa
B1 Into muscularis propria but not penetrating it. No nodes.
B2 Penetrating muscularis propria. No nodes.
C1 As B1 with nodes
C2 As B2 with nodes
D Distant metastases.

A 56-year-old lady presents to your clinic with a craggy mass in her
epigastrium, 2 stone of weight loss over 4 months and general malaise.
You are concerned that this may represent a gastric malignancy. As part
of her assessment you notice a velvety dark brown pigmentation in her
axillae and groin creases which you recognise as acanthosis nigricans.
Which of the following statements is correct regarding paraneoplastic
syndromes? Select one answer only.
A. They are the consequence of microscopic deposits of tumour cells
which act locally to produce symptoms
B. Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome is often found with ovarian
carcinoma
C. Cushing syndrome associated with small cell lung carcinoma
D. Trousseau’s sign is associated with gastric carcinoma
E. Necrolytic migratory erythema is associated with insulinomas.

ANSWER IS C
Paraneoplastic syndromes are diseases or syndromes which are a
consequence of cancer cells in the body but not due to the local action
of cancer cells. Lambert-Eaton myaesthenic syndrome is found as a
consequence of small cell lung cancer, Trousseau‟s sign is multiple
crops of tender venous nodules caused by hypercoagulability and
venous thrombosis associated with bronchogenic carcinoma and
pancreatic carcinoma. Necrotic migratory erythema is associated with
glucagonomas.

You are counselling a young lady who has come into your clinic
enquiring about testing for familial breast cancer. She has a mother who
developed the disease at 65 and a grandmother who developed it at 43.
Which of the following statements is correct regarding the genetics of
inherited cancers? Select one answer only.
A. Retinoblastoma is a condition associated with hereditary blindness. It
is caused by germline mutations in the Rb1 gene oh Ch 13 in the

323
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


majority of cases
B. BRCA I and BRCA II are genes responsible for inherited breast
cancer. They are both associated with an approximate 80% lifetime risk
of breast cancer but BRCA I is also associated with an increased risk of
developing ovarian cancer whilst BRCA II is not
C. Familial Adenomatous Polyposis is a condition which increases the
risk of colorectal carcinoma hugely. The APC (adenomatous polyposis
coli) gene is found on Ch5 and is mutated in a large proportion of this
condition
D. Li-Fraumeni syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition caused by
mutations in the P53 gene
E. Hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (Lynch syndrome) is an
autosomal dominant condition associated with microsatellite instability
which gives carries a 45% lifetime risk of colorectal cancer.
 ANSWER IS C
The RB1 gene is a tumour suppressor gene on Ch13. In inherited RB
(30%) there is a germline inactivation of the RB1 gene followed by a
somatic mutation in the retinal cells later (two hit hypothesis). This
condition is usually bilateral. In the more common non-heredited RB
both of the mutations are somatic and this tends to be unilateral. BRCA I
(Ch17) is associated with 80% risk of breast cancer and 50% risk of
ovarian cancer over a lifetime whereas the risk of ovarian cancer from
BRCA II (Ch13) is 25%. BRCA II is also associated with tumours
involving the ovaries, fallopian tubes, prostate and pancreas together
with malignant melanoma. Li Fraumeni is an autosomal dominant
condition associated with mutations in the TP53 gene (Ch 17) which
encodes for the p53 protein. It is associated with osteosarcoma, breast
cancer, brain cancer, leukaemia and adrenocortical cancer. Lynch
syndrome, is associated with colorectal cancer (80% lifetime risk),
ovarian, endometrial, stomach, small intestine, hepatobiliary, upper
urinary, brain and skin cancers. IT is due to DNA mismatch repair
impairment.

A 42-year-old lady has been referred to your breast service with a
history of a small lump adjacent to the scar in her right breast. She has
previously had a wide local excision and sentinel node biopsy for 24mm
of grade 3 invasive ductal cancer with node negativity 1 year previously.
Following her original surgery she had radiotherapy and chemotherapy
followed by Tamoxifen. She is still having periods. Her new lump is very
suspicious on imaging for a 2cm recurrent carcinoma and a biopsy has
revealed recurrent grade 3 carcinoma ER +ve. Which of the following
statements is correct regarding her condition and its treatment? Select

324
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


one answer only.
A. The most appropriate treatment is a wide local excision of the tumour
followed by radiotherapy to treat the remaining breast
B. She should have her Tamoxifen changed to anastrazole in
combination with her surgical management
C. She does not need further axillary assessment as her previous
sentinel node was negative
D. This lady should be counselled for a mastectomy +/- immediate
reconstruction
E. Staging is not indicated as it would not change your operative
management.

ANSWER IS D
This lady has already had a wide local excision for an invasive breast
cancer and developed a recurrence on endocrine treatment. The
management of this is therefore a mastectomy and discussion of
reconstruction. The axilla would have to be treated as part of this
procedure depending on the results of the axillary ultrasound scan. She
would not be able to have a repeat wide local excision and radiotherapy
as she has already had radiotherapy before. Despite developing a
recurrence on Tamoxifen, changing her to Anastrazole would be
disadvantageous as aromatase inhibitors are only effective in post-
menopausal women. Prior to surgery staging with CT scans and a bone
scan should be undertaken to assess for distant metastases. If these are
present it may alter the surgical treatment offered.

You see a 67-year-old lady in your clinic. She has been complaining of 2
months of anorexia, abdominal bloating and 2 stones of weight loss. A
CT scan suggests a thickened stomach and OGD reveals linitis plastica.
Which of the following statements is true of stomach cancer? Select one
answer only.
A. There is a strong association between heavy alcohol intake and
stomach cancer
B. The majority of stomach cancers are associated with H.pylori
infection
C. Gastric carcinoma is commoner in women than men
D. Linitis plastica tends to be associated with H.pylori infection
E. There are two major types of gastric carcinoma, diffuse and intestinal
type. Both are adenocarcinomata.




325
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


 ANSWER IS E
H.pylori infection is the main risk factor for 65-80% of gastric carcinomas
but only occurs in 2% of infections. Men are affected more commonly
than women. Smoking also increases the risk from 40% increased risk
for current smokers to 82% increased risk for heavy smokers. Other risk
factors include autoimmune atrophic gastritis, pernicious anaemia,
Menetrier‟s disease and intestinal metaplasia. Linitis plastic tends not to
be associated with H.pylori and has a more genetic association

You have been asked to see a postoperative patient who recently had a
right hemicolectomy for node positive cancer. The MDT has
recommended chemotherapy in the adjuvant setting. Your patient wants
to ask you questions about the toxicity and side effects of this adjuvant
treatment as they are understandably concerned. Which of the following
is correct regarding the side effects of chemotherapy? Select one
answer only.
A. The majority of septic episodes associated with chemotherapy are
due to normal micro-organisms found in the mouth or gastrointestinal
tracts
B. Typhlitis is a life threatening complication of chemotherapy
characterised by intravascular dissemination and haemorrhagic
pulmonary infiltrates
C. Although nausea and vomiting are common, due to potential
interactions between the chemotherapeutic agents and anti-emetics,
they are only used where absolutely necessary
D. Chemotherapy induces hair loss at the same rate in both men and
women
E. Chemotherapy is only potentially teratogenic after the 1st trimester
has passed as this represents the period of most rapid growth for a
developing fetus.

ANSWER IS A
85% of chemotherapy associated infections are normally found in the
GIT or oral cavity as commensal organisms. They only turn into
pathogens when the state of low immunity is introduced. Typhlitis is the
potential life threatening gastrointestinal complication of chemotherapy
associated with nausea, vomiting, abdomen distention, fever chills and
pain. Nausea and vomiting is such a common and troublesome
complication that anti-emetics are usually part of standard chemotherapy
regimens. Hair loss following chemotherapy is very common and affects
women more than men. Regeneration usually occurs a few weeks after


326
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


the last treatment and can change color, texture and style. The
teratogenic effects of chemotherapy is most evident in the 1st trimester.

A 64-year-old lady is referred to your breast clinic with an impalpable
screen detected 11mm carcinoma in the upper outer aspect of her right
breast. Lymph nodes are negative on ultrasound of the axilla and the
tumor is a grade 2 invasive ductal carcinoma (ER/PR +ve, HER-2 –ve).
Which of the following statements is true regarding the UK breast
screening service? Select one answer only.
A. Screening is carried out by all hospitals with a breast unit in the UK
B. Screening for breast cancer is for women between the ages of 55 –
75 in the UK
C. Screen detected breast cancers tend to have a higher proportion of
invasive when compared to non-invasive breast cancers but caught at
an early stage
D. Screening is undertaken every 2 years for post-menopausal women
E. Screening is undertaken using 2 view mammograms double read by 2
consultant radiologists

 ANSWER IS E
Screening is a nationally regionally distributed and locally delivered
service. Women between the ages of 50 – 70 are invited by local
screening centers to attend for 2 view mammographic screening every 3
years in a mixture of mobile and static units. These mammograms are
then interpreted by 2 consultant radiologists and further imaging +/-
biopsies are organized if needed. If treatment is needed, patients are
referred to local breast units for this. There are therefore diagnostic
screening units with treatment being referred to local hospitals. The age
range is being extended to 47-73 by the end of 2014. Screen detected
cancers tend to be smaller, non-invasive, low grade, lymph node
negative and ER +ve (ie better prognosis).

A 35-year-old Australian „sun worshipper‟ presents to your clinic with a
pigmented lesion on her right arm. You suspect this to represent a
melanomatous lesion. Which of the following statements is correct
regarding malignant melanoma? Select one answer only.
A. It represents a common skin cancer
B. Clark’s level is used to delineate severity of disease in malignant
melanoma relating to lymph node involvement and distant metastases
C. Bresslow’s thickness is of less prognostic relevance than Clark’s
level

327
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


D. The commonest site of melanoma in men is on the back
E. The presence of tumour infiltrating lymphocytes is a bad prognostic
sign.

ANSWER IS D
Malignant melanoma represent a relatively rare skin cancer when
compared to SCC and BCC but claim the most lives worldwide. There is
a well-recognized association with UV light exposure and is commonest
in Caucasian fair haired, blue eyed individuals. In men the commonest
site is the back whilst in women it is the legs.
Clark‟s level describes the level of invasion but is not as reliable or
reproducible as Bresslow‟s thickness. I. confined to epidermis
(melanoma in situ)
II. Invasion into papillary dermis
III. Invasion to the junction of papillary and reticular dermis
IV. Invasion into the reticular dermis
V. Invasion into the subcutaneous fat.
Bresslow‟s thickness looks at the depth of invasion and is used to guide
further treatment and extent of excision.
I. < 0.75mm
II. 0.75 - 1.5 mm
III. 1.51mm – 2.25mm
IV. 2.25mm – 3.0mm
V. > 3mm.
Tumour infiltrating lymphocytes are recruited in the vertical growth phase
to varying degrees. They can cause regression and are a good
prognostic sign.

A 76-year-old women presents to your clinic with an ulcerated lesion on
her left temple. Examination with a dermatoscope suggests that this is a
probable squamous cell carcinoma. Which of the following statements
correctly describes this condition? Select one answer only.
A. SCC of the skin represents the commonest cutaneous malignancy
B. SCC produces systemic metastases more commonly than basal cell
carcinoma
C. The link between SCC and chronic sun exposure is less convincing
than that of BCC
D. They form a characteristic ulcerated lesion with rolled edges
E. Metastases is more commonly by the haematogenous route.




328
                                                            MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS B
SCC are the second commonest type of skin cancer after BCC (20% of
non-melanomatous skin cancers) and usually occurs in sun exposed
areas which is the major risk factor. Immunosuppression is another
important risk factor. SCC have a much higher rate of metastases then
BCC (although still low) and it is usually by the lymphatic route. They
classically present on sun exposed areas a growing lump with a rough
scaly surface and flat reddish plaques although ulceration can occur if
left untreated.




329
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 21 year old man is stabbed in the antecubital fossa. A decision is
made to surgically explore the wound. At operation the surgeon dissects
down onto the brachial artery. A nerve is identified medially, which nerve
is it likely to be?
Radial
Recurrent branch of median
Anterior interosseous
Ulnar
Median
                                                      ANSWER IS E

A 28 year old rugby player injures his right humerus and on examination
is noted to have a minor sensory deficit overlying the point of deltoid
insertion into the humerus. Which of the nerves listed below is most
likely to have been affected?
Radial
Axillary
Musculocutaneous
Median
Subscapular
                                                      ANSWER IS B

A 25 year old man is stabbed in the upper arm. The brachial artery is
lacerated at the level of the proximal humerus, and is being repaired. A
nerve lying immediately lateral to the brachial artery is also lacerated.
Which of the following is the nerve most likely to be?
Ulnar nerve
Median nerve
Radial nerve
Intercostobrachial nerve
Axillary nerve

ANSWER IS B
The brachial artery begins at the lower border of teres major and
terminates in the cubital fossa by branching into the radial and ulnar
arteries. In the upper arm the median nerve lies closest to it in the lateral
position. In the cubital fossa it lies medial to it.

Which of the following is not a content of the cavernous sinus?

330
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Oculomotor nerve
Internal carotid artery
Opthalmic nerve
Abducens nerve
Optic nerve

ANSWER IS E
Mnemonic for contents of cavernous sinus:
O TOM CAT

Occulomotor nerve (III)
Trochlear nerve (IV)
Ophthalmic nerve (V1)
Maxillary nerve (V2)
Carotid artery
Abducent nerve (VI)
T

OTOM=lateral wall components
CA= components within sinus

The optic nerve lies above and outside the cavernous sinus

A 43 year old man is due to undergo an excision of the sub mandibular
gland. Which of the following incisions is the most appropriate for this
procedure?
A transversely orientated incision 3cm below the mandible
A transversely orientated incision immediately inferior to the mandible
A vertical incision 3 cm anterior to the angle of the mandible and
extending inferiorly
A transversely orientated incision 2cm above the mandible
A transversely orientated incision 12cm below the mandible

ANSWER IS A
To access the sub mandibular gland a transverse incision 3cm below the
mandible should be made. Incisions located higher than this may
damage the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve.

A 23 year old man presents with appendicitis. A decision is made to
perform an appendicectomy. The operation commences with a 5cm
331
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


incision centered on McBurneys point. Which of the following structures
will be encountered first during the dissection?
External oblique aponeurosis
Internal oblique muscle
Transversalis fascia
Rectus sheath
Peritoneum

ANSWER IS A
The external oblique will be encountered first in this location. The rectus
sheath lies more medially.
The external oblique muscle is the most superficial of the abdominal wall
muscles. It originates from the 5th to 12th ribs and passes inferomedially
to insert into the linea alba, pubic tubercle and anterior half of the iliac
crest. It is innervated by the thoracoabdominal nerves (T7-T11) and sub
costal nerves.

A 73 year old lady is admitted with brisk rectal bleeding. Despite
attempts at resuscitation the bleeding proceeds to cause haemodynamic
compromise. An upper GI endoscopy is normal. A mesenteric
angiogram is performed and a contrast blush is seen in the region of the
sigmoid colon. The radiologist decides to embolise the vessel supplying
this area. At what spinal level does it leave the aorta?
L2
L1
L4
L3
T10

ANSWER IS D
The inferior mesenteric artery leaves the aorta at L3. It supplies the left
colon and sigmoid. Its proximal continuation to communicate with the
middle colic artery is via the marginal artery

A 5 year old boy presents with recurrent headaches. As part of his
assessment he undergoes an MRI scan of his brain. This demonstrates
enlargement of the lateral and third ventricles. Where is the most likely
site of obstruction?


332
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Foramen of Luschka
Foramen of Magendie
Foramen of Munro
Aqueduct of Sylvius
None of the above

ANSWER IS D
The CSF flows from the 3rd to the 4th ventricle via the Aqueduct of
Sylvius.

A 23 year old man is undergoing an inguinal hernia repair. The surgeons
mobilise the spermatic cord and place it in a hernia ring. A small slender
nerve is identified superior to the cord. Which nerve is it most likely to
be?
Iliohypogastric nerve
Pudendal nerve
Femoral branch of the genitofemoral nerve
Ilioinguinal nerve
Obturator nerve

ANSWER IS D
The ilioinguinal nerve passes through the inguinal canal and is the nerve
most commonly identified during hernia surgery. The genitofemoral
nerve splits into two branches, the genital branch passes through the
inguinal canal within the cord structures. The femoral branch of the
genitofemoral nerve enters the thigh posterior to the inguinal ligament,
lateral to the femoral artery. The iliohypogastric nerve pierces the
external oblique aponeurosis above the superficial inguinal ring.

Surgical occlusion of which of these structures, will result in the greatest
reduction in hepatic blood flow?
Portal vein
Common hepatic artery
Right hepatic artery
Coeliac axis
Left hepatic artery

ANSWER IS A


333
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


The portal vein transports 70% of the blood supply to the liver, while the
hepatic artery provides 30%. The portal vein contains the products of
digestion. The arterial and venous blood is dispersed by sinusoids to the
central veins of the liver lobules; these drain into the hepatic veins and
then into the IVC. The caudate lobe drains directly into the IVC rather
than into other hepatic veins.

Which of the structures listed below is not a content of the carotid
sheath?
Internal jugular vein
Internal carotid artery
Vagus nerve
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Common carotid artery

ANSWER IS D
 Contents of carotid sheath:
Common carotid artery
Internal carotid artery
Internal jugular vein
Vagus nerve

Which of the following muscles does not attach to the radius?
Pronator quadratus
Biceps
Brachioradialis
Supinator
Brachialis

ANSWER IS E
The brachialis muscle inserts into the ulna. The other muscles are all
inserted onto the radius.

A 53 year old man is undergoing a distal pancreatectomy for trauma.
Which of the following vessels is responsible for the arterial supply to the
tail of the pancreas?
Splenic artery
Pancreaticoduodenal artery
Gastric artery
334
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


Hepatic artery
Superior mesenteric artery

ANSWER IS A
 Pancreatic head is supplied by the pancreaticoduodenal artery
Pancreatic tail is supplied by branches of the splenic artery
There is an arterial watershed in the supply between the head and tail of
the pancreas. The head is supplied by the pancreaticoduodenal artery
and the tail is supplied by branches of the splenic artery.

Which of the following structures does not pass through the foramen
ovale?
Lesser petrosal nerve
Accessory meningeal artery
Maxillary nerve
Emissary veins
Otic ganglion

ANSWER IS C
Mnemonic: OVALE

O tic ganglion
V3 (Mandibular nerve:3rd branch of trigeminal)
A ccessory meningeal artery
L esser petrosal nerve
E missary veins
A 43 year old lady presents with varicose veins and undergoes a
saphenofemoral disconnection, long saphenous vein stripping to the
ankle and isolated hook phlebectomies. Post operatively she notices an
area of numbness superior to her ankle. What is the most likely cause
for this?
Sural nerve injury
Femoral nerve injury
Saphenous nerve injury
Common peroneal nerve injury
Superficial peroneal nerve injury

ANSWER IS C


335
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


The sural nerve is related to the short saphenous vein. The saphenous
nerve is related to the long saphenous vein below the knee and for this
reason full length stripping of the vein is no longer advocated.

A 65 year old man with long standing atrial fibrillation develops an
embolus to the lower leg. The decision is made to perform an
embolectomy, utilising a trans popliteal approach. After incising the deep
fascia, which of the following structures will the surgeons encounter first
on exploring the central region of the popliteal fossa?
Popliteal vein
Common peroneal nerve
Popliteal artery
Tibial nerve
None of the above

ANSWER IS D
The tibial nerve lies superior to the vessels in the inferior aspect of the
popliteal fossa. In the upper part of the fossa the tibial nerve lies lateral
to the vessels, it then passes superficial to them to lie medially. The
popliteal artery is the deepest structure in the popliteal fossa.

Inspection of the left ventricle reveals all except which of the following?
Papillary muscles
Trabeculae carnae
Chordae tendinae
Conus arteriosus
Openings of the venae cordis minimae

ANSWER IS D
The conus arteriosus (infundibulum) is the smooth walled outflow tract of
the right ventricle leading to the pulmonary trunk.

Where does the spinal cord terminate in neonates?
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5

336
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS C
At the 3rd month the foetus's spinal cord occupies the entire length of
the vertebral canal. The vertebral column then grows longer exceeding
the growth rate of the spinal cord. This results with the cord being at L3
at birth and L1-2 by adulthood.

A 23 year old lady with troublesome axillary hyperhidrosis is undergoing
a thorascopic sympathectomy to treat the condition. Which of the
following structures will need to be divided to access the sympathetic
trunk?
Intercostal vein
Intercostal artery
Parietal pleura
Visceral pleura
None of the above

ANSWER IS C
The sympathetic chain lies posterior to the parietal pleura. During a
thorascopic sympathetomy this structure will need to be divided. The
intercostal vessels lie posteriorly. They may be damaged with
troublesome bleeding but otherwise are best left alone as deliberate
division will not improve surgical access.

In which space is a lumbar puncture performed?
Subdural space
Epidural space
Subarachnoid space
Extradural space
Intraventricular space

ANSWER IS C
Samples of CSF are normally obtained by inserting a needle between
the third and fourth lumbar vertebrae. The tip of the needle lies in the
sub arachnoid space, the spinal cord terminates at L1 and is not at risk
of injury. Clinical evidence of raised intracranial pressure is a
contraindication to lumbar puncture.

The following statements relating to the musculocutaneous nerve are
true except?
It arises from the lateral cord of the brachial plexus
It provides cutaneous innervation to the lateral side of the forearm
337
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


If damaged, then extension of the elbow joint will be impaired
It supplies the biceps muscle
It runs beneath biceps

ANSWER IS C
 It supplies biceps, brachialis and coracobrachialis. If damaged then
elbow flexion will be impaired.

A 10 year old child has a grommet inserted for a glue ear. What type of
epithelium is present on the external aspect of the tympanic membrane?
Stratified squamous
Ciliated columnar
Non ciliated columnar
Non stratified squamous
None of the above

ANSWER IS A
The external aspect of the tympanic membrane is lined by stratified
squamous epithelium. This is significant clinically in the development of
middle ear infections when this type of epithelium may migrate inside the
middle ear.

What is the course of the median nerve relative to the brachial artery in
the upper arm?
Medial to anterior to lateral
Lateral to posterior to medial
Medial to posterior to lateral
Medial to anterior to medial
Lateral to anterior to medial

ANSWER IS E
 Relations of median nerve to the brachial artery:
Lateral -> Anterior -> Medial
The median nerve descends lateral to the brachial artery, it usually
passes anterior to the artery to lie on its medial side. It passes deep to
the bicipital aponeurosis and the median cubital vein at the elbow. It
enters the forearm between the two heads of the pronator teres muscle.



338
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


A 43 year old man is undergoing a right hemicolectomy and the ileo-colic
artery is ligated. From which of the following vessels is it derived?
Inferior mesenteric artery
Superior mesenteric artery
Coeliac axis
Aorta
None of the above

ANSWER IS B
The ileocolic artery is a branch of the SMA and supplies the right colon
and terminal ileum. The transverse colon is supplied by the middle colic
artery. As veins accompany arteries in the mesentery and are lined by
lymphatics, high ligation is the norm in cancer resections. The ileo-colic
artery branches off the SMA near the duodenum.

A 22 year old man is undergoing a wedge excision of his great toenail.
As the surgeon passes a needle into the area to administer local
anaesthetic, the patient notices a sharp pain. By which pathway will this
sensation be conveyed to the central nervous system?
Anterior corticospinal tract
Posterior spinocerebellar tract
Cuneate fasciculus
Vestibulospinal tract
Spinothalamic tract

ANSWER IS E
Spinothalamic tract- Pain and temperature
Vestibulospinal tract- Motor neuronal signals relating to posture
Cuneate fasciculus- Fine touch, pressure and proprioception
Posterior spinocerebellar tract- Proprioceptive signals to cerebellum
Anterior corticospinal tract- Conveys motor signals from precentral gyrus
to motor cells within the cord
Pain impulses are transmitted via the spinothalamic tract

A 34 year old man undergoes excision of a sarcoma from the right
buttock. During the procedure the sciatic nerve is sacrificed. Which of
the following will not occur as a result of this process?
Loss of extension at the knee joint
Foot drop

339
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Inability to extend extensor hallucis longus
Unchanged sensation to the posterior aspect of the thigh
Loss of sensation to the posterior aspect of the lower leg
ANSWER IS A
Extension of the knee joint is caused by the obturator and femoral
nerves. Sensation to the posterior aspect of the thigh is via the posterior
cutaneous nerve of the thigh and this is a direct branch from the plexus
itself.

A 73 year old lady is admitted with acute mesenteric ischaemia. A CT
angiogram is performed and a stenotic lesion is noted at the origin of the
superior mesenteric artery. At which of the following levels does this
branch from the aorta?
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5

ANSWER IS A
The SMA leaves the aorta at L1. It passes under the neck of the
pancreas prior to giving its first branch the inferior pancreatico-duodenal
artery.

A 45 year old man is undergoing a low anterior resection for a carcinoma
of the rectum. Which of the following fascial structures will need to be
divided to mobilise the mesorectum from the sacrum and coccyx?
Denonvilliers fascia
Colles fascia
Sibsons fascia
Waldeyers fascia
None of the above

ANSWER IS D
 Fascial layers surrounding the rectum:
Anteriorly lies the fascia of Denonvilliers
Posteriorly lies Waldeyers fascia
Waldeyers fascia separates the mesorectum from the sacrum and will
need to be divided.

340
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A



An elderly man develops a squamous cell carcinoma affecting the lobule
of his ear. Do which lymph node is the lesion most likely to metastasize?
Deep cervical nodes
Mastoid nodes
Superficial parotid nodes
Superficial cervical nodes
Deep parotid nodes

ANSWER IS D
The lobule drains to the superficial cervical nodes.
Which of the following statements concerning the sympathetic nervous
system is most accurate? Select one answer only.
A. Cell bodies of the postganglionic neurones lie in the intermediolateral
horn of the spinal cord
B. Efferent neurones leave the spinal cord from all thoracic and lumbar
segments
C. Preganglionic neurones reach the adrenal medulla without synapsing
D. The sympathetic chain extends three quarters of the length of the
vertebral column
E. The vagus nerve carries postganglionic sympathetic neurons.
ANSWER IS C
The sympathetic nerves originate in the spinal cord from segments T1–
L2. The preganglionic neurones have their cell bodies in the
intermediolateral horn of the spinal cord. They leave the spinal cord in
the anterior roots and pass to the paired sympathetic chains, which run
the entire length of the vertebral column. There are no sympathetic
fibres in the vagus nerve.




341
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


An 80 year old lady is brought to the emergency department by her
carers. She has been unwell for the past few days. On examination, she
has a cold, pulseless leg with fixed mottling, below the knee. A duplex
scan shows a stenosis of the profunda femoris and popliteal artery with
no flow distal to this. What is the most appropriate course of action.
Femoro-femoro cross over graft
Axillo- femoral bypass graft
Trans femoral amputation
Gritti Stokes amputation
Administration of intravenous unfractionated heparin

ANSWER IS C
 Fixed mottling is a sign of an unsalvageable limb and mandates either
amputation or palliation. A through knee amputation (Gritti Stokes) is
unlikely to heal in this setting.

An 83 year old woman is admitted with a left intertrochanteric neck of
femur fracture. On examination, the patient is found to have an ejection
systolic murmur loudest in the aortic region. There is no radiation of the
murmur to the carotid arteries. Her ECG is normal. What is the most
likely lesion?
Mitral valve stenosis
Aortic valve sclerosis
Aortic valve stenosis
Tricuspid valve stenosis
Mitral valve regurgitation

ANSWER IS B
 The most likely diagnosis is aortic sclerosis. The main differential
diagnosis is of aortic stenosis, however as there is no radiation of the
murmur to the carotids and the ECG is normal, this is less likely.

A 73 year old man develops sudden onset abdominal pain and
collapses. On examination he has a tender pulsatile mass in his upper
abdomen. He has a blood pressure of 90/60mmHg and pulse rate of 105
beats per minute. Which of the following intravenous fluid regimens is
most appropriate, whilst waiting for operative repair?
1 Litre of pentastarch over 15 minutes
1 litre of Hartmans solution over 4 hours

342
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


1 litre of gelofusin over 30 minutes
1 litre of Hartmans solution over 30 minutes
1 litre of blood over 15 minutes

ANSWER IS B
This man will have a contained haematoma and is awaiting surgery.
Rapid, high volume infusions may cause this to dislodge with disastrous
consequences.

A 73 year old women collapses with sudden onset of abdominal pain
and the passes a large amount of diarrhoea. On admission, she is
vomiting repeatedly. She has recently been discharged from hospital
following a myocardial infarct but recovered well. What is the most likely
cause?
Acute superior mesenteric artery embolus
Acute inferior mesenteric artery embolus
Pancreatitis
Infection with clostridium difficile
Myocarditis

ANSWER IS A
Sudden onset of abdominal pain and forceful bowel evacuation are
features of acute mesenteric infarct. The SMA is more likely to be
involved than the IMA and that makes this the most likely diagnosis.
Severe vomiting is not commonly seen with clostridium difficile infection.

A 19 year old lady presents with recurrent episodes of pain in her hands.
She notices that her symptoms are worst in cold weather. When she
gets the pain she notices that her hands are very pale, they then
become dark blue in colour. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Axillary artery embolus
Brachial artery embolus
Raynaulds disease
Cervical rib
Rheumatoid

ANSWER IS C
Raynauds disease is characterised by a series of colour changes and
discomfort is often present. The young age at presentation coupled with
343
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


the absence of a smoking history (in most cases) makes occlusive
disease unlikely.

A 73 year old lifelong heavy smoker presents to the vascular clinic with
symptoms of foot ulceration and rest pain. On examination, her foot has
areas of gangrene and pulses are impalpable. Which of the ABPI
measurements shown below is most compatible with this process?
>1.2
1.0
0.3
0.8
0.5

ANSWER IS C
This is critical limb ischaemia. Values of 0.3 are typical in this setting and
urgent further imaging is needed. Debridement of necrosis prior to
improving arterial inflow carries a high risk of limb loss.

A 21 year old post man notices leg pain after 5 minutes walking during
his round. It improves 3 minutes after stopping. Clinically he is noted to
have reduced hair of the lower limbs and his calf muscles appear
atrophied. There is a weak popliteal pulse, but it is still present when the
knee is fully extended. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Occlusive arterial disease caused by atherosclerosis
Popliteal fossa entrapment
Cerebral vascular accident
Diabetes mellitus
Adductor canal compression syndrome

ANSWER IS E
Adductor canal compression syndrome most commonly presents in
young males and is an important differential diagnosis in men presenting
with symptoms of acute limb ischaemia on exertion. It is caused by
compression of the femoral artery by the musculotendinous band from
adductor magnus muscle.
The treatment consists of the division of the abnormal band and
restoration of the arterial circulation. Popliteal fossa entrapment is the
main differential diagnosis, however the pulse disappears when the knee
is fully extended.

344
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A



An 83 year old lady with a significant cardiac history is admitted with rest
pain and bilateral leg ulcers. Imaging demonstrates bilateral occlusion of
both common iliac arteries that are unsuitable for stenting. What is the
most appropriate intervention?
Femoro-femoral cross over graft
Axillo-bifemoral bypass graft
Bilateral trans femoral amputations
Aorto-bifemoral bypass graft
Femoro-distal bypass

ANSWER IS B
In patients with major cardiac co-morbidities the safest option is to
choose an axillo-bifemoral bypass graft. The long term patency rates are
less good than with aorto-bifemoral bypass grafts, however, the
operation is less major.

Which of the following is not a feature of a Charcot foot?
Bounding foot pulses in the early phases
Often occurs in the complete absence of trauma
Erythema of the foot in the early phase
Autonomic neuropathy
Peripheral neuropathy

ANSWER IS B
Trauma (even if only minor) is a prerequisite. Patients cannot usually
recall the traumatic event. The associated neuropathy means that
patients continue to walk on the affected foot with subsequent deformity
developing over time.

Which of the following statements related to coronary artery bypass
surgery is true?
Late graft stenosis is mainly associated with saphenous vein grafts
Is indicated if there is stenosis > 70% of the right coronary artery
The left atrium is cannulated during the procedure
The CHADS score is used to assess peri operative risk
Cardioplegia is always undertaken at a 37 degrees



345
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS A
Indications are:

1. Left main stem stenosis or equivalent (proximal LAD and proximal
circumflex)
2. Triple vessel disease
3. Diffuse disease unsuitable for PCI
The right atrium is cannulated. The CHADS score assesses whether a
patient should be warfarinised if they have atrial fibrillation. Cardioplegia
can be undertaken at cold or warm temperatures.

A 65 year old man presents, for the first time, with pain at the back of his
calves when he mobilises 10 metres. He is known to have hypertension.
What is the most appropriate investigation?
Arterial duplex scan
MRI angiogram
DSA angiogram
Aortic USS
Knee x-ray

ANSWER IS A
An arterial duplex should be performed first, before progression to an
angiography.

A 32 year old woman attends clinic for assessment of varicose veins.
She has suffered for varicose veins for many years and can trace their
development back to when she suffered a complex tibial fracture. On
examination she has marked truncal varicosities with a long tortuous
long saphenous vein. What is the most appropriate next step?
Arrange a venogram
Arrange a venous duplex scan
List her for a trendelenberg procedure
List her for injection foam sclerotherapy
List her for multiple avulsion phlebectomies

ANSWER IS B
This lady is likely to have deep venous incompetence as she will have
been immobilised for her tibial fracture and may well have had a DVT. A


346
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


duplex scan is mandatory prior to any form of surgical intervention. A
venogram would provide similar information but is more invasive.

A 52 year old male attends the stroke unit with dizziness and vertigo
while playing tennis. He is known to have hypertension and a previous
myocardial infarct. He now complains of right arm pain. What is the most
likely diagnosis?
Posterior circulation infarct
Vertebrobasilar aneurysm
Dissection of thoracic aorta
Subclavian steal syndrome
Left middle cerebral artery infarct

ANSWER IS D
Subclavian steal syndrome characteristically presents with posterior
circulation symptoms, such as dizziness and vertigo, during exertion of
an arm. There is subclavian artery steno-occlusive disease proximal to
the origin of the vertebral artery and is associated with flow reversal in
the vertebral artery. Management involves percutaneous transluminal
angioplasty or a stent

A 38 year old lady is troubled by lymphoedema that occurred following a
block dissection of the groin for malignant melanoma many years
previously. Despite therapy with compression bandages she has
persistent lower leg swelling impairing her activities of daily living. She
has no evidence of recurrent malignancy. Lymphoscintography
demonstrates occlusion of the groin lymphatics. However, the distal
lymphatic system appears healthy. Which of the following options could
be considered?
Lymphovenous anastomosis
Homans procedure
Charles procedure
Loop diurectic therapy long term
Amputation

ANSWER IS A
In young patients with proximal disease and healthy distal lymphatics a
lymphovenous anastomosis may be considered. Such cases are rare.


347
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A 34 year old man presents with varicose veins and it is suspected that
these are part of the Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome. Which of the
following is not a characteristic of this condition?
Presence of varicose veins
Gigantism of a limb
Long saphenous vein involvement
Port wine stains with clear borders
Arteriovenous fistulae

ANSWER IS C
The Klippel-Trenaunay vein is a large, lateral, superficial vein sometimes
seen at birth. This vein begins in the foot or the lower leg and travels
proximally until it enters the thigh or the gluteal area. Otherwise,
varicosities may not be clinically evident until the child begins to
ambulate.
Varicosities may be extensive, though they often spare the saphenous
distribution. They are seen below the knee, laterally above the knee, and
occasionally in the pelvic region. Varicosities may affect the superficial,
deep, and perforating venous systems.
Surgical exploration has demonstrated atresia and agenesis of deep
veins, compression due to fibrous bands, aberrant arteries, abnormal
muscles, or venous sheaths.
Rarely, varicosities have been found in the bladder, the colon, and the
pulmonary vessels.

A 74 year old lady has a long standing venous leg ulcer overlying her
medial malleolus. Which of the following statements relating to the
management of this condition is false?
Pentoxifylline may speed ulcer healing
Treatment with daily low dose flucloxacillin may speed ulcer healing
Multilayer bandages may provide compression equivalent to 40mmHg
Large ulcers may be considered for skin grafting
They should not be treated with compression stockings if the ankle /
brachial pressure index is 0.4

ANSWER IS B
Routine use of antibiotics is not advised as this may predispose to
resistant organisms. Pentoxifylline was subjected to a Cochrane review
in 2007 and shown to improve healing rates.


348
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


A 70 year old lady presents with a painless neck lump. There is a mass
noted beneath the sternocleidomastoid muscle. There is a long history
and somewhat unkindly her husband remarked on her rather noticeable
halitosis. What is the most likely explanation?
Branchial cyst
Branchial fistula
Pharyngeal pouch
Thyroglossal cyst
Dental caries

ANSWER IS C
Usual history of regurgitation of undigested food or coughing at night.
Associated with halitosis and throat infections.

A 72 year old man undergoes a distal gastrectomy for carcinoma of the
stomach. He presents with jaundice approximately 8 months post
operatively. Ultrasound of the liver and bile ducts shows no focal liver
lesion and normal calibre common bile duct with intra hepatic duct
dilatation. What is the most likely explanation?
Peri hilar lymphadenopathy
Fitz- Hugh Curtis syndrome
Gilberts syndrome
Mirizzi syndrome
Gallstones

ANSWER IS A
Unfortunately metastatic disease is the most likely event. Peri hilar
lymphadenopathy would be a common culprit.

A 67 year old lady presents with jaundice and abdominal pain. Her
investigations show a dilated common bile duct, a carcinoma of the
pancreatic head compressing the pancreatic duct. Her liver contains bi-
lobar metastasis. What is the most appropriate course of action?
Undertake synchronous resection of liver metastases and
pancreatoduodenectomy
Resection of liver metastases, chemotherapy and then resection of the
primary lesion
Insertion of endoscopic biliary stent and consideration of palliative
chemotherapy

349
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Palliation alone
Insertion of PTC and palliation

ANSWER IS C
The presence of metastatic disease in the context of pancreatic cancer
renders this incurable and resection of metastatic disease is not
appropriate.

A 18 year old boy falls off a balcony and hits the right side of the head.
He is admitted to the emergency department and has a GCS of 8. He is
admitted for observation, and over the following twelve hours develops
an increasing headache and confusion. A CT scan shows a crescent
shaped collection of fluid between the brain and the dura with associated
midline shift. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Acute sub dural haematoma
Chronic sub dural haematoma
Acute extra dural haematoma
Chronic extra dural haematoma
Sub arachnoid haemorrhage

ANSWER IS A
Sub dural haematomas are the commonest intracranial mass lesions
resulting from trauma. They are classified as acute, sub acute or chronic
according to tempo of onset. Acute sub dural haematomas will present
within 72 hours of the original injury and have hyperdense, crescent
shaped appearances on CT scanning.

A 78 year old lady is admitted with a 3 hour history of passage of dark
red blood per rectum. Prior to this event, she was otherwise well with no
major medical co-morbidities. On examination, she has a mild
tachycardia but other vital signs are normal, abdomen is soft and non
tender. Digital rectal exam reveals dark blood but no other findings.
What is the most likely underlying cause?
Diverticular disease
Meckels diverticulum
Jejunal diverticulosis
Angiodysplasia of the colon
Colonic cancer


350
                                                             MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS A
Diverticular disease is the commonest cause of lower GI bleeding in
adults.

A 19 year old lady has a long standing history of diarrhoea and weight
loss. She is investigated with an upper gastro intestinal endoscopy
which is normal. A small bowel contrast study shows a terminal ileal
stricture. A colonoscopy was performed which was normal but the
endoscopist was unable to intubate the terminal ileum. One week after
the colonoscopy she is admitted with small bowel obstruction. Steroids
are administered but despite this she fails to improve. What is the most
appropriate treatment?
Administration of steroids at increased dose
Right hemicolectomy
Small bowel resection
Sub total colectomy
Pan proctocolectomy

ANSWER IS B
Crohns disease commonly affects the terminal ileum and in this case the
ileocaecal valve, this means some form of colonic resection will be
needed in addition to the small bowel resection.
It is likely that this lady has terminal ileal disease. Although first
presentation of Crohns disease is usually managed with IV steroids,
these have been trialed here and failed. A resection will remove the
stricturing disease. If proximal small bowel disease has not been
excluded pre-operatively then this must be evaluated during surgery to
exclude other small bowel strictures.

A 40 year old woman is admitted with abdominal pain. She has suffered
from repeated episodes of this colicky right upper quadrant pain. On
examination, she is pyrexial with right upper quadrant peritonism. Her
blood tests show a white cell count of 23. However, the liver function
tests are normal. An abdominal ultrasound scan shows multiple
gallstones in a thick walled gallbladder, the bile duct measures 4mm.
What is the best course of action?
Administration of broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics and perform a
delayed open cholecystectomy in 3 months
Arrange a radiological cholecystotomy
Undertake a laparoscopic cholecystectomy

351
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Undertake an open cholcystectomy
Administration of broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics and perform a
delayed laparoscopic cholecystectomy in 3 months

ANSWER IS C
This lady has acute cholecystitis and needs an acute cholecystectomy.
This operation should usually be performed within 72 hours of
admission. Delay beyond this timeframe will usually result in increased
operative complications and most surgeons would administer antibiotics
and perform and interval cholecystectomy if the early window for an
acute procedure is missed. A bile duct measuring 4mm is usually
normal.

A 70 year old female is admitted with a history of passing brown
coloured urine and abdominal distension. Clinically she has features of
large bowel obstruction with central abdominal tenderness. She is
maximally tender in the left iliac fossa. There is no evidence of
haemodynamic instability. What is the most appropriate investigation?
Cystogram
Abdominal X-ray of the kidney, ureters and bladder
Computerised tomogram of the abdomen and pelvis
Flexible sigmoidoscopy
Barium enema

ANSWER IS C
This lady is most likely to have a colovesical fistula complicating
diverticular disease of the sigmoid colon. In addition she may also have
developed a diverticular stricture resulting in large bowel obstruction. A
locally advanced tumour of the sigmoid colon may produce a similar
clinical picture. The best investigation of this acute surgical patient is an
abdominal CT scan, this will demonstrate the site of the disease and
also supply regional information such as organ involvement and other
local complications such as a pericolic abscess. A barium enema would
require formal bowel preparation and this is contra indicated where large
bowel obstruction is suspected. A flexible sigmoidoscopy is unlikely to
be helpful and the air insufflated at the time of endoscopy may make the
colonic distension worse. A cystogram would provide only very limited
information.



352
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 65 year old lady is admitted with large bowel obstruction. On
investigation with CT, she is found to have a tumour of the mid rectum
with no evidence of metastatic disease. What is the most appropriate
course of action?
Formation of a loop colostomy
Laparotomy and Hartmanns procedure
Pan proctocolectomy and end ileostomy
Low anterior resection and covering loop ileostomy
Low anterior resection and end colostomy

ANSWER IS A
Avoid emergency resections in large bowel obstruction due to rectal
cancer

This patient has presented with large bowel obstruction. However, in the
case of rectal cancer, she is incompletely staged as ability to completely
resect the lesion can only be determined with MRI scanning and this
information is not provided. Even if the lesion were resectable, in the
emergency setting, it is often safer to undertake a simple procedure
such as a loop colostomy and then complete surgery at a later date. A
low anterior resection and loop ileostomy in this situation would almost
certainly leak (and for the reasons outlined above, may be incomplete).

A 72 year old man develops a foot drop after a revision total hip
replacement. Which nerve is likely to have been affected?
Sciatic
Femoral
Obturator
Superior gluteal
Inferior gluteal

ANSWER IS A
Whilst many of these nerves can be injured in hip surgery, for a foot
drop to develop in this context (i.e. revision THR), the sciatic nerve is the
most likely.

A 63 year old lady is undergoing an axillary sentinel lymph node biopsy
as part of her breast cancer treatment. Which of the structures listed
below is most likely to be encountered?

353
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Subclavian artery
Intercostobrachial nerve
Upper cord of the brachial plexus
Lower cord of the brachial plexus
Axillary nerve

ANSWER IS B
This can be a challenging question. A particularly careless surgeon
could encounter all of these. However, during a routine level 1 axillary
exploration which is where the majority of sentinel nodes will be located,
the nerves most commonly encountered are the intercostobrachial
nerves.

A 45 year old motor cyclist sustains a tibial fracture and is noted to have
anaesthesia of the web space between his first and second toes. Which
of the nerves listed below is most likely to be compromised?
Superficial peroneal nerve
Deep peroneal nerve
Sural nerve
Long saphenous nerve
Tibial nerve

ANSWER IS B
The deep peroneal nerve lies in the anterior muscular compartment of
the lower leg and can be compromised by compartment syndrome
affecting this area. It provides cutaneous sensation to the first web
space. The superficial peroneal nerve provides more lateral cutaneous
innervation.

A 73 year old man presents with a tumour at the central aspect of the
posterior third of the tongue. To which of the following lymph node
groups is it most likely to metastasise?
Submental
Submandibular
Ipsilateral deep cervical nodes
Contralateral deep cervical nodes
Bilateral deep cervical nodes




354
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS E
 Posterior third tumours of the tongue commonly metastasise to the
bilateral deep cervical lymph nodes
Tumours of the posterior third of the tongue will typically metastasise
early and bilateral nodal involvement is well recognised, this is most
often true of centrally located tumours and those adjacent to the midline
as the lymph vessels may cross the median plane at this location.

Which of the following structures is not transmitted by the jugular
foramen?
Hypoglossal nerve
Accessory nerve
Internal jugular vein
Inferior petrosal sinus
Vagus nerve

ANSWER IS A
Contents of the jugular foramen:

Anterior: inferior petrosal sinus
Intermediate: glossopharyngeal, vagus, and accessory nerves
Posterior: sigmoid sinus (becoming the internal jugular vein) and some
meningeal branches from the occipital and ascending pharyngeal
arteries

The jugular foramen may be divided into three compartments:
Anterior compartment transmits the inferior petrosal sinus
Middle compartment transmits cranial nerves IX, X and XI
Posterior compartment transmits the sigmoid sinus.
A 21 year old man undergoes surgical removal of an impacted 3rd
molar. Post operatively, he is noted to have anaesthesia on the
anterolateral aspect of the tongue. What is the most likely explanation?
Injury to the hypoglossal nerve
Injury to the inferior alveolar nerve
Injury to the lingual nerve
Injury to the mandibular branch of the facial nerve
Injury to the glossopharyngeal nerve
ANSWER IS C
The lingual nerve is closely related to the third molar and up to 10% of
patients undergoing surgical extraction of these teeth may subsequently
355
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


develop a lingual neuropraxia. The result is anaesthesia of the ipsilateral
anterior aspect of the tongue. The inferior alveolar nerve innervates the
teeth themselves.

What is the correct embryological origin of the stapes?
First pharyngeal arch
Second pharyngeal arch
Third pharyngeal arch
Fourth pharyngeal arch
Fifth pharyngeal arch

ANSWER IS B
Embryological origin stapes = 2nd pharyngeal arch
The ectoderm covering the outer aspect of the second arch originates
from a strip of ectoderm lateral to the metencephalic neural fold. The
cartilaginous element to this, eponymously known as Reicherts cartilage
extends from the otic capsule to the midline on each side. Its dorsal end
separates and becomes enclosed in the tympanic cavity as the stapes.
The dorsal ends of the cartilages of the first and second pharyngeal
arches articulate superior to the tubotympanic recess. These cartilages
form the malleus, incus and stapes. At least part of the malleus is
formed from the first arch and the stapes from the second arch. The
incus is most likely to arise from the first arch.

A 6 month old child is brought to the surgical clinic because of non
descended testes. What is the main structure that determines the
descent path of the testicle?
Processus vaginalis
Cremaster
Mesorchium
Inguinal canal
Gubernaculum

ANSWER IS E
The gubernaculum is a ridge of mesenchymal tissue that connects the
testis to the inferior aspect of the scrotum. Early in embryonic
development the gubernaculum is long and the testis are located on the
posterior abdominal wall. During foetal growth the body grows relative to
the gubernaculum, with resultant descent of the testis.

356
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A



A 35 year old farm labourer injures the posterior aspect of his hand with
a mechanical scythe. He severs some of his extensor tendons in this
injury. How many tunnels lie in the extensor retinaculum that transmit the
tendons of the extensor muscles?
One
Three
Four
Five
Six

ANSWER IS E
There are six tunnels, each lined by its own synovial sheath.

A 20 year old lady presents with pain on the medial aspect of her thigh.
Investigations show a large ovarian cyst. Compression of which of the
nerves listed below is the most likely underlying cause?
Sciatic
Genitofemoral
Obturator
Ilioinguinal
Femoral cutaneous

ANSWER IS C
The cutaneous branch of the obturator nerve is frequently absent.
However, the obturator nerve is a recognised contributor to innervation
of the medial thigh and large pelvic tumours may compress this nerve
with resultant pain radiating distally.

A 23 year old man is involved in a fight outside a nightclub and sustains
a laceration to his right arm. On examination, he has lost extension of
the fingers in his right hand. Which of the nerves listed below is most
likely to have been divided?
Median
Musculocutaneous
Radial
Ulnar
Axillary


357
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A



ANSWER IS C
The radial nerve supplies the extensor muscle group.

The superior aspect of the vagina drains to which of the following lymph
node groups?
Superficial inguinal nodes
Para-aortic nodes
Internal iliac nodes
Meso rectal nodes
Obturator nodes

ANSWER IS C

A 23 year old man undergoes an orchidectomy. The right testicular vein
is ligated; into which structure does it drain?
Right renal vein
Inferior vena cava
Common iliac vein
Internal iliac vein
External iliac vein

ANSWER IS B
The testicular venous drainage begins in the septa and these veins
together with those of the tunica vasculosa converge on the posterior
border of the testis as the pampiniform plexus. The pampiniform plexus
drains to the testicular vein. The left testicular vein drains into the left
renal vein. The right testicular vein drains into the inferior vena cava.

What is the lymphatic drainage of the ovaries?
Internal iliac nodes
Common iliac nodes
Para-aortic nodes
Para uterine nodes
Inguinal nodes

ANSWER IS C

358
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


The lymphatic drainage of the ovary follows the gonadal vessels and
drainage is therefore to the para-aortic nodes.

Which of the muscles listed below is not innervated by the median
nerve?
Flexor pollicis brevis
Lateral two lumbricals
Pronator teres
Opponens pollicis
Adductor pollicis

ANSWER IS E
Adductor pollicis is innervated by the ulnar nerve.
Medial two lumbricals innervated by the ulnar nerve.

A patient undergoes a femoral hernia repair and at operation the
surgeon decides to enter the abdominal cavity to resect small bowel.
She makes a transverse incision two thirds of the way between
umbilicus and the symphysis pubis. Which of the structures listed below
is least likely to be divided?
Rectus abdominis
External oblique aponeurosis
Peritoneum
Fascia transversalis
Posterior lamina of the rectus sheath

ANSWER IS E
An incision at this level lies below the arcuate line and the posterior wall
of the rectus sheath is deficient at this level.
Which of the following nerves supplies the skin on the palmar aspect of
the thumb?
Ulnar
Median
Radial
Musculocutaneous
None of the above

ANSWER IS B

359
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


The median nerve supplies cutaneous sensation to this region.

An injured axillary artery is ligated between the thyrocervical trunk of the
subclavian and subscapular artery. Subsequent collateral circulation is
likely to result in reversal of blood flow in which of the vessels listed
below?
Circumflex scapular artery
Transverse cervical artery
Posterior intercostal arteries
Suprascapular artery
Profunda brachii artery

ANSWER IS A
It's an easy question really, we just made the wording difficult (on
purpose). It is asking about the branches of the axillary artery and
knowledge of the fact that there is an extensive collateral network
around the shoulder joint. As a result, the occlusion of the proximal
aspect of the circumflex humeral inflow (from the axillary artery) ceases
and there is then retrograde flow through it from collaterals.
The circumflex scapular artery is a branch of the subscapular artery and
normally supplies the muscle on the dorsal aspect of the scapula. In this
instance, flow is reversed in the circumflex scapular and subscapular
arteries forming a collateral circulation around the scapula.

A 44 year old lady is undergoing an abdominal hysterectomy and the
ureter is identified during the ligation of the uterine artery. At which site
does it insert into the bladder?
Posterior
Apex
Anterior
Base
Superior aspect of the lateral side

ANSWER IS D
The ureters enter the bladder at the upper lateral aspect of the base of
the bladder. They are about 5cm apart from each other in the empty
bladder. Internally this aspect is contained within the bladder trigone.




360
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


A 19 year old female is admitted with suspected meningitis. The House
Officer is due to perform a lumbar puncture. What is the most likely
structure first encountered when the needle is inserted?
Ligamentum flavum
Denticulate ligament
Dural sheath
Pia Mater
Supraspinous ligament

ANSWER IS E

A 10 year old boy is admitted to the emergency department following a
fall. On examination, there is deformity and swelling of the forearm. The
ability to flex the fingers of the affected limb is impaired. However, there
is no sensory impairment. Imaging confirms a displaced upper forearm
fracture. Which of the nerves listed below is likely to have been
affected?
Ulnar
Posterior interosseous nerve
Anterior interosseous nerve
Axillary
Radial

ANSWER IS C
Forearm fractures may be complicated by neurovascular compromise.
The anterior interosseous nerve may be affected. It has no sensory
supply so the defect is motor alone.

A 23 year old woman is admitted with loin pain and a fever, she has
noticed haematuria for the past week accompanied by dysuria, this was
treated empirically with trimethoprim. What is the most likely cause?
Stone disease
Cystitis
Pyelonephritis
Renal cancer
Detrusor instability

ANSWER IS C


361
                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A


This is most likely pyelonephritis and partially treated cystitis is a
common cause.

Which of the agents listed below can be administered via the peripheral
route in the non cardiac arrest setting?
Milrinone
Noradrenaline
Adrenaline
Metaraminol
Dobutamine

ANSWER IS D
Metaraminol is an alpha receptor agonist.
As a general rule, inotropes and vasopressors can only be administered
via a central vein. Metaraminol is an exception to this as it can be
administered via a peripheral line.

A 56 year old man is admitted with passage of a large volume of blood
per rectum. On examination, he is tachycardic, his abdomen is soft,
although he has marked dilated veins on his abdominal wall.
Proctoscopy reveals large dilated veins with stigmata of recent
haemorrhage. What is the most appropriate treatment?
IV terlipressin
Excisional haemorrhoidectomy
Injection sclerotherapy
Proctectomy
Rectal pack insertion

ANSWER IS A
Rectal varices are a recognised complication of portal hypertension. In
the first instance they can be managed with medical therapy to lower
pressure in the portal venous system. TIPSS may be considered. Whilst
band ligation is an option, attempting to inject these in same way as
haemorroids would carry a high risk of precipitating further
haemorrhage.

A 28 year old man with Crohn's disease has undergone a number of
resections. His BMI is currently 18 and his albumin is 18. He feels well
but does have a small localised perforation of his small bowel. The

362
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


gastroenterologists are giving azathioprine. What is the most appropriate
advice regarding feeding?
Nil by mouth
Nil by mouth and continuous intra venous fluids until surgery
Enteral feeding
Parenteral feeding
Nutritional supplements

ANSWER IS D
This man is malnourished, although he is likely to require surgery it is
best for him to be nutritionally optimised first. As he may have reduced
surface area for absorption and has a localised perforation TPN is likely
to be the best feeding modality.

A 68 year old man with type 2 diabetes is admitted to hospital unwell. On
examination, he has features of septic shock and right upper quadrant
tenderness. He is not jaundiced. Imaging shows a normal calibre bile
duct and no stones in the gallbladder. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Acute calculous cholecystitis
Acute acalculous cholecystitis
Cholangitis
Mirizzi syndrome
Sphincter of oddi dysfunction

ANSWER IS B
This is the classic description of acalculous cholecystitis and its
commonest in patients with type 2 diabetes. If you answered it
incorrectly, ensure that you were not caught out by the acute calculous
cholecystitis as this is a common exam mistake if options are mis read in
a rush.

A 22 year old man is involved in a road traffic accident. He is found to
have a pelvic fracture. While on the ward the nursing staff report that he
is complaining of lower abdominal pain. On examination, you find a
distended tender bladder. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Bladder rupture
Ureter injury
Urethral injury


363
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Clot retention
Prostate rupture

ANSWER IS C
Pelvic fractures may cause laceration of the urethra. Urinary retention,
blood at the urethral meatus and a high riding prostate on digital rectal
examination are the typical features.

Which blood test is most likely to be helpful in the following situation? A
20 year old lady has undergone a total thyroidectomy for a well
differentiated papillary carcinoma. She attends clinic and is well and the
surgeon wishes to screen for disease recurrence.
Calcitonin
Antibodies to TSH receptor
Antibodies to parafollicular c cells
Thyroid peroxidase antibodies
Thyroglobulin antibodies

ANSWER IS E
Antibodies to thyroglobulin, the major constituent of colloid and
precursor of thyroid hormones may be elevated in those with metastatic
or recurrent thyroid cancer. Results may be erroneous in those with
other thyroid disorders.

A 75 year old man is admitted with sudden onset severe generalised
abdominal pain, vomiting and a single episode of bloody diarrhoea. On
examination, he looks unwell and is in uncontrolled atrial fibrillation.
Although diffusely tender his abdomen is soft. What is the most likely
diagnosis?
Pancreatitis
Infective diarrhoea
Ischaemic colitis
Crohns disease
Mesenteric infarction

ANSWER IS E
Pain out of proportion to physical signs, AF and generalized abdominal
pain suggest widespread infarction.

364
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


A 40 year old woman is admitted with abdominal pain. She has suffered
from repeated episodes of this colicky right upper quadrant pain. On
examination, she is pyrexial with right upper quadrant peritonism. Her
blood tests show a white cell count of 23. However, the liver function
tests are normal. An abdominal ultrasound scan shows multiple
gallstones in a thick walled gallbladder, the bile duct measures 4mm.
What is the best course of action?
Administration of broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics and perform a
delayed open cholecystectomy in 3 months
Arrange a radiological cholecystotomy
Undertake a laparoscopic cholecystectomy
Undertake an open cholcystectomy
Administration of broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics and perform a
delayed laparoscopic cholecystectomy in 3 months

ANSWER IS C
This lady has acute cholecystitis and needs an acute cholecystectomy.
This operation should usually be performed within 72 hours of
admission. Delay beyond this timeframe will usually result in increased
operative complications and most surgeons would administer antibiotics
and perform and interval cholecystectomy if the early window for an
acute procedure is missed. A bile duct measuring 4mm is usually
normal.

A 72 year old man has just undergone an emergency repair for a
ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm. Pre operatively he was taking
aspirin, clopidogrel and warfarin. Intra operatively he received 5000 units
of unfractionated heparin prior to application of the aortic cross clamp.
His blood results on admission to the critical care unit are as follows:
Full blood count
Hb 8 g/dl
Platelets 40 * 109/l
WBC 7.1 * 109/l
His fibrin degradation products are measured and found to be markedly
elevated. Which of the following accounts for these results?
Anastomotic leak
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Heparin induced thrombocytopenia
Adverse effect of warfarin
Adverse effects of antiplatelet agents


365
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS B
The combination of low platelet counts and raised FDP in this setting
make DIC the most likely diagnosis.

A patient undergoes a femoral hernia repair and at operation the
surgeon decides to enter the abdominal cavity to resect small bowel.
She makes a transverse incision two thirds of the way between
umbilicus and the symphysis pubis. Which of the structures listed below
is least likely to be divided?
Rectus abdominis
External oblique aponeurosis
Peritoneum
Fascia transversalis
Posterior lamina of the rectus sheath

ANSWER IS E
An incision at this level lies below the arcuate line and the posterior wall
of the rectus sheath is deficient at this level.

A 42 year old man is admitted to surgery with acute appendicitis. He is
known to have hypertension, psoriatic arthropathy and polymyalgia
rheumatica. His medical therapy includes:
Paracetamol 1g qds
Codeine phosphate 30mg qds
Bendrofluazide 2.5 mg od
Ramipril 10mg od
Methotrexate 7.5mg once a week
Prednisolone 5mg od
You are called by the core surgical trainee to assess this man as he has
become delirious and hypotensive 2 hours after surgery. His blood
results reveal:
Na+ 132 mmol/l
K+ 5.2 mmol/l
Urea 10 mmol/l
Creatinine 111 µmol/l
Glucose 3.5
CRP 158
Hb 10.2 g/dl
Platelets 156 * 109/l
WBC 14 * 109/l
366
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


What is the most likely diagnosis?
Septic shock secondary to appendicitis
Neutropenic sepsis
Phaeochromocytoma
Perforated bowel
Addisonian crisis

ANSWER IS E
Features of an addisonian crisis:
Hyponatraemia
Hyperkalaemia
Hypoglycaemia

This man is on steroids for polymyalgia rheumatica. Surgery can
precipitate acute adrenal deficiency. The diagnosis is further confirmed
by the blood results of hyponatraemia, hyperkalaemia and
hypoglycaemia. This patient urgently needs hydrocortisone.

A 52 year old male presents with discomfort in the fingers of his left
hand. On examination, the ring and little fingers of his left hand are
flexed and unable to extend completely. He is able to make a fist with
the hand. Palpation reveals thickened nodules on the medial half of the
palm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
de Quervain's tenosynovitis
Tendon sheath infection
Dupuytren's contracture
Ganglion
Heberden's nodes

ANSWER IS C
Discomfort of the hand is not uncommon in Dupuytrens contracture, true
pain is unusual. The disease most commonly affects the ring and little
fingers.

A 65 year old male with known nasopharyngeal carcinoma presents with
double vision over a few weeks. On examination he is found to have left
eye proptosis and it is down and out. He reports pain on attempting to
move the eye. There is an absent corneal reflex. What is the most likely
diagnosis?

367
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


Posterior communicating artery aneurysm
Cavernous sinus syndrome
Optic nerve tumour
Migraine
Cerebral metastases

ANSWER IS B
Cavernous sinus syndrome is most commonly caused by cavernous
sinus tumours. In this case, the nasopharyngeal malignancy has locally
invaded the left cavernous sinus. Diagnosis is based on signs of pain,
opthalmoplegia, proptosis, trigeminal nerve lesion (opthalmic branch)
and Horner's syndrome.

A 30 year old man is admitted overnight, following a road traffic accident.
He has an open tibial fracture with a 20 cm wound and extensive
periosteal stripping. He is neurovascularly intact; IV antibiotics and
wound dressing have been administered in the emergency department.
What is the most appropriate course of action?
Immediate skeletal stabilisation and application of negative pressure
dressing
Skeletal fixation followed by vascular reconstruction
Immediate vascuIar shunting, followed by temporary skeletal
stabilisation and vascular reconstruction
Combined skeletal and soft tissue reconstruction on a scheduled
operating list
Fasciotomy with four compartment decompression

ANSWER IS D
This patient has a Gustillo-Anderson Grade 3B open fracture. He will
require definitive skeletal and soft tissue reconstruction, which should be
performed on a combined ortho-plastic scheduled operating list, as per
the BOA/BAPRAS guidelines. The surgery does not have to be
performed out of scheduled hours unless there is marine/ sewage
contamination, vascular compromise or it is a polytrauma.
Whilst it is reasonable to apply an external fixator prior to definitive
skeletal and soft tissue reconstruction, this should be converted to
internal fixation within 72 hours.

A 48 year old woman is admitted with sepsis secondary to an infected
diabetic foot ulcer. She has a necrotic and infected forefoot with necrosis
368
                                                               MCQS MRCS-A


of the heel. There is a boggy indurated swelling anterior to the ankle
joint. Pulses are normal. What is the best course of action?
Above knee amputation
Amputation of the foot
Below knee amputation
Incision and drainage of pus
Application of 4 layer bandages

ANSWER IS C
A below knee amputation is the best option here. The foot is non
salvageable. However, she may ambulate with a prosthesis.

A 6 day old child is suspected of having a malrotation and requires
urgent abdominal exploration. What is the most appropriate surgical
approach?
Midline abdominal incision
Paramedian incision
Transverse supra umbilical abdominal incision
Transverse infra umbilical abdominal incision
Battle incision

ANSWER IS C
In young children, laparotomy is performed via transverse supra
umbilical incision. Access via midline incisions is very poor and they
should not be used.

A consultant surgeon is undertaking increasingly complex neonatal
surgery. However, this is in breach of guidance following a series of
adverse outcomes. Previously it had been stated that these should be
performed with close supervision. Two further babies die and the
surgeon still refuses to undertake these procedures under supervision.
What is the correct course of action?
Review the cases at the next mortality and morbidity meeting
Discuss the situation with the coroner
Arrange for it to be discussed at the consultants next appraisal
Discuss the matter with the General Medical Council
Discuss the matter with the British Medical Association

ANSWER IS D
369
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


 It is likely that the practice restrictions were imposed by the GMC and
given that there is an ongoing risk to patients and the surgeon is in
breach of those practice restrictions, it would be appropriate to raise this
with the GMC.

Which of the following substances is commonly used to sterilize
endoscopic equipment?
Aqueous phenol
80% phenol
Absolute alcohol
Glutaraldehyde
Gamma irradiation

ANSWER IS D
Most endoscopic processors use glutaraldehyde which is an effective
antimicrobial agent. It is widely recognized as being a cause of
hypersensitivity reactions and is thus used in closed systems.

A 73 year old man presents with a tumour at the central aspect of the
posterior third of the tongue. To which of the following lymph node
groups is it most likely to metastasise?
Submental
Submandibular
Ipsilateral deep cervical nodes
Contralateral deep cervical nodes
Bilateral deep cervical nodes

ANSWER IS E
Posterior third tumours of the tongue commonly metastasise to the
bilateral deep cervical lymph nodes

Tumours of the posterior third of the tongue will typically metastasise
early and bilateral nodal involvement is well recognised, this is most
often true of centrally located tumours and those adjacent to the midline
as the lymph vessels may cross the median plane at this location.

In which of the following operations would the use of a cell salvage
device be permitted?


370
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Ivor - Lewis oesophagectomy
Revision arthroplasty of the hip
Revision abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery for graft infection
Mastectomy and latissimus dorsi flap for invasive ductal carcinoma
Excision of osteogenic sarcoma from the femur

ANSWER IS B
Infection and malignancy are contra indications to use of cell saver
devices.

An 8 year old boy presents with abdominal pain,a twelve hour history of
vomiting, a fever of 38.3 0C and four day history of diarrhoea. His
abdominal pain has been present for the past week. What is the most
likely cause?
Coeliac disease
Appendix abscess
Irritable bowel syndrome
Mesenteric adenitis
Diverticulitis

ANSWER IS B
The high fever and diarrhoea together with vomiting all point to a pelvic
abscess. The presence of pelvic pus is highly irritant to the rectum, and
many patients in this situation will complain of diarrhoea. Mesenteric
adenitis is less likely to run such a protracted course. IBS does not
typically produce such marked systemic symptoms. Diverticulitis is
almost unheard of in children.

A 20 year old man is trapped in a warehouse fire. He has sustained 60%
burns to his torso and limbs. The limb burns are partial thickness but the
torso burns are full thickness. He was intubated by paramedics at the
scene and is receiving intravenous fluids. His ventilation pressure
requirements are rising. What is the best course of action?
Ventilate the patient in the prone position
Escharotomy
Extubate the patient
Undertake skin grafting
Transfer to a burns unit


371
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


ANSWER IS B
He requires an escharotomy as this will be contributing to impaired
ventilation. That may need to precede transfer.

Which of the following blood gas results would fit with metabolic acidosis
with a compensatory respiratory alkalosis?
pH 7.36, PaCO2 7.3, PO2 8.9 (FiO2 40%), Bicarbonate 30.2, Base
excess +5.3
pH 7.14, PaCO2 7.4, PaO2 8.9 (FiO2 40%), Bicarbonate 14 mmol, Base
excess -10.6
pH 7.57, PaCO2 3.5, Pa O2 24.5 (FiO2 85%), Bicarbonate 23.5, Base
excess +1.8 mmol
pH 7.32, PCO2 3.8, PaO2 22.2 (FiO2 40%), Bicarbonate 19.1, Base
excess -7.9
pH 7.19, pCO2 10.2, pO2 16 (FiO2 85%), Bicarbonate 23.8, Base
excess -2.2 mmol

                                                ANSWER IS D

A 60 year old Tibetan immigrant is referred to the surgical clinic with a
painless neck swelling. On examination, it is located on the left side in
the anterior triangle. There are no other abnormalities to find. What is
the most likely diagnosis?
Carotid body tumour
Submandibular gland calculus
Carotid artery aneurysm
Fibromatosis colli
Laryngeal cancer

ANSWER IS A
The most likely diagnosis is a carotid body tumour and it is likely to be of
the hyperplastic type.

A 4 year old girl is admitted with lethargy and abdominal pain. On
examination, she is febrile, temperature 38.1oC, pulse rate is 150 and
blood pressure is 100/60. Her abdomen is soft but there is some right
sided peritonism. Her WCC is 14 and urinanalysis is positive for
leucocytes but is otherwise normal. What is the best course of action?


372
                                                                 MCQS MRCS-A


Mange as urinary tract infection with oral antibiotics
Manage as urinary tract infection with intravenous antibiotics
Take to theatre for appendicectomy within 6 hours
Undertake ultrasound scan
Admit for serial clinical examination

ANSWER IS C
Children with appendicitis do not localize in the same way as adults and
often the diagnosis is difficult and all too often made late. The findings of
right sided peritonism are ominous and the low grade fever and
tachycardia and WCC are strongly suggestive of appendicitis. The
findings of an isolated leukocytosis are suggestive of appendicitis over
UTI. The diagnosis of appendicitis is clinical and undertaking imaging is
not going to change management which should comprise
appendicectomy, this should be undertaken promptly.

Which of the following statements in relation to fistula in ano is untrue?
High fistulae are safest treated with a seton insertion
Low fistulae may be laid open
They are typically probed with Lockhart Mummary probes
When discovered during incision and drainage of peri anal abscess;
should always be probed to locate the internal opening
When complicating Crohns disease, may respond to infliximab

ANSWER IS D
 Probing fistulae during acute sepsis is associated with a high
complication rate and should not be undertaken routinely.

A 73 year old lady presents with an ulcer overlying her medial malleolus.
It is painless and has been present for 4 months. She has oedema of the
lower limbs and her ABPI measures 0.9. What is the best management
option?
Compression bandages
Non compression bandaging
Split thickness skin grafting
Full thickness skin grafting
Angioplasty and non compression bandages

ANSWER IS A

373
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


This is likely to be a venous leg ulcer. These are typically managed
using compression bandages. Contra indications to this technique
include peripheral vascular disease (not present here).

An 8 year old boy presents with symptoms of right knee pain. The pain
has been present on most occasions for the past three months and the
pain typically lasts for several hours at a time. On examination; he walks
with an antalgic gait and has apparent right leg shortening. What is the
most likely diagnosis?
Perthes Disease
Osteosarcoma of the femur
Osteoarthritis of the hip
Transient synovitis of the hip
Torn medial meniscus

ANSWER IS A
There are many causes of the irritable hip in the 10-14 year age group.
Many of these may cause both hip pain or knee pain. Transient synovitis
of the hip the commonest disorder but does not typically last for 3
months. An osteosarcoma would not usually present with apparent limb
shortening unless pathological fracture had occurred. A slipped upper
femoral epiphysis can cause a similar presentation although it typically
presents later and with different patient characteristics.

A 38 year old woman undergoes a gastric bypass procedure. Post
operatively she attends the clinic and complains that following a meal
she develops vertigo and develops crampy abdominal pain. What is the
most likely underlying explanation?
Insulin resistance
Irritable bowel syndrome
Biliary colic
Dumping syndrome
Enterogastric reflux

ANSWER IS D
Dumping syndrome, which can be divided into early and late, may occur
following gastric surgery. It occurs as a result of a hyperosmolar load
rapidly entering the proximal jejunum. Osmosis drags water into the
lumen, this results in lumen distension (pain) and then diarrhoea.

374
                                                              MCQS MRCS-A


Excessive insulin release also occurs and results in hypoglycaemic
symptoms.

A 28 year old man develops an acute paronychia and subsequent
spreading sepsis. The tissue exudate has a higher protein content than
normal tissue because?
Breakdown of tissue cells release protein
Capillary walls are more permeable
Increased blood flow transports more protein into the area
Intracapillary pressure is raised
Plasma cells release gamma globulin

ANSWER IS B
The increased permeability allows the exudation of plasma proteins.
A 14 year old female is admitted with sudden onset right iliac fossa pain.
She is otherwise well and on examination has some right iliac fossa
tenderness but no guarding. She is afebrile. Urinary dipstick is normal.
Her previous menstrual period two weeks ago was normal and
pregnancy test is negative. What is the most likely underlying diagnosis?
Mittelschmerz
Endometriosis
Appendicitis
Crohns disease
Pelvic abscess

ANSWER IS A
The timing of the pain and the fact that it is mid cycle makes
Mittelschmerz the most likely cause. When follicular cysts rupture, there
is sometimes associated bleeding of small volume. The cyst contents
and blood if present can be very irritant and pain can sometimes mimic
appendicitis or pelvic inflammatory disease. However, normal
inflammatory markers makes the former less likely and unless the 14
year old was sexually active, PID is also relatively rare in this group.
Crohns disease and pelvic abscesses would typically present with a
more protracted history and raised inflammatory markers and fever

Which of the following is not well absorbed following a gastrectomy?
Vitamin c
Zinc

375
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Vitamin B12
Copper
Molybdenum

ANSWER IS C
Vitamin B12. The others are unaffected

Post gastrectomy syndrome
Rapid emptying of food from stomach into the duodenum: diarrhoea,
abdominal pain, hypoglycaemia
Complications: Vitamin B12 and iron malabsorption, osteoporosis
Treatment: High protein, low carbohydrate diet. Replace B12/Fe/Ca.

A 72 year old man develops a foot drop after a revision total hip
replacement. Which nerve is likely to have been affected?
Sciatic
Femoral
Obturator
Superior gluteal
Inferior gluteal

ANSWER IS A
Whilst many of these nerves can be injured in hip surgery, for a foot
drop to develop in this context (i.e. revision THR), the sciatic nerve is the
most likely.

A 25 year old female presents with a lump in her neck. On examination,
she has a discrete nodule in the right lobe of the thyroid. A fine needle
aspirate shows papillary cells. An adjacent nodule is also sampled which
shows similar well differentiated papillary cells. What is the most likely
cause?
Hashimotos thyroiditis
Papillary carcinoma
Follicular carcinoma
Medullary carcinoma
Thyroid B Cell lymphoma

ANSWER IS B


376
                                                                MCQS MRCS-A


Multifocal disease is a recognised feature of papillary lesions. Papillary
adenomas are not really recognised and most well differentiated lesions
are papillary carcinomas.

A 40 year old man undergoes a complex appendicectomy and the
wound fails to heal satisfactorily. The wound site itself is associated with
multiple sinuses and fistulas. Pus is sent for microbiology and shows
gram positive organisms and sulphur granules. What is the most likely
underlying diagnosis?
Infection with Staphylococcus aureus
Infection with Bacteroides fragilis
Actinomycosis
Crohns disease
Ulcerative colitis

ANSWER IS C
The presence of chronic sinuses together with gram positive organisms
and sulphur granules is highly suggestive of Actinomycosis. Crohns
disease is associated with multiple fistulae, but not gram positive
organisms with sulphur granules.

Which of the conditions listed below is most likely to account for the
following arterial blood gas result:
pH 7.49
pO2 8.5
Bicarbonate 22
pCO2 2.4
Chloride 12meq
Respiratory alkalosis
Metabolic alkalosis
Metabolic acidosis
Type II respiratory failure
Metabolic acidosis with increased anion gap

ANSWER IS A
The hyperventilation results in decreased carbon dioxide levels, causing
a respiratory alkalosis (non compensated).




377
                                                                                  MCQS MRCS-A

A 72 year old female presents with a painless breast lump. Clinically, she has a 4cm diameter
irregular breast mass, with no other palpable masses.
What is the most likely lesion?
Invasive ductal carcinoma
Ductal carcinoma in situ
Lobular carcinoma in situ
Invasive lobular carcinoma
Atypical ductal hyperplasia


ANSWER IS A
A post menopausal woman is more likely to have a ductal carcinoma and they tend to occur at a
single focus within the breast.




000---------------------------------------------------------------------------------000




                                 DR MUHAMMAD SHAKEEL AMJAD
                                     MBBS, MCPS, FCPS (SURGERY)



               SOURCE:


                                       Dated: 19-12-2018




378
